"ACT I"
"SCENE I. A desert place."
"Thunder and lightning. Enter three Witches"
"When shall we three meet again"
"In thunder, lightning, or in rain?"
"When the hurlyburly's done,"
"When the battle's lost and won."
"That will be ere the set of sun."
"Where the place?"
"Upon the heath."
"There to meet with Macbeth."
"I come, Graymalkin!"
"Paddock calls."
Anon.
"Fair is foul, and foul is fair:"
"Hover through the fog and filthy air."
Exeunt
"SCENE II. A camp near Forres."
"Alarum within. Enter DUNCAN, MALCOLM, DONALBAIN, LENNOX, with Attendants, meeting a bleeding Sergeant"
"What bloody man is that? He can report,"
"As seemeth by his plight, of the revolt"
"The newest state."
"This is the sergeant"
"Who like a good and hardy soldier fought"
"'Gainst my captivity. Hail, brave friend!"
"Say to the king the knowledge of the broil"
"As thou didst leave it."
"Doubtful it stood,"
"As two spent swimmers, that do cling together"
"And choke their art. The merciless Macdonwald--"
"Worthy to be a rebel, for to that"
"The multiplying villanies of nature"
"Do swarm upon him--from the western isles"
"Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied,"
"And fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling,"
"Show'd like a rebel's whore: but all's too weak:"
"For brave Macbeth--well he deserves that name--"
"Disdaining fortune, with his brandish'd steel,"
"Which smoked with bloody execution,"
"Like valour's minion carved out his passage"
"Till he faced the slave,"
"Which ne'er shook hands, nor bade farewell to him,"
"Till he unseam'd him from the nave to the chaps,"
"And fix'd his head upon our battlements."
"O valiant cousin! worthy gentleman!"
"As whence the sun 'gins his reflection"
"Shipwrecking storms and direful thunders break,"
"So from that spring whence comfort seem'd to come"
"Discomfort swells. Mark, king of Scotland, mark:"
"No sooner justice had with valour arm'd"
"Compell'd these skipping kerns to trust their heels,"
"But the Norweyan lord surveying vantage,"
"With furbish'd arms and new supplies of men"
"Began a fresh assault."
"Dismay'd not this"
"Our captains, Macbeth and Banquo?"
Yes,
"As sparrows eagles, or the hare the lion."
"If I say sooth, I must report they were"
"As cannons overcharged with double cracks, so they"
"Doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe:"
"Except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds,"
"Or memorise another Golgotha,"
"I cannot tell."
"But I am faint, my gashes cry for help."
"So well thy words become thee as thy wounds,"
"They smack of honour both. Go get him surgeons."
"Exit Sergeant, attended"
"Who comes here?"
"Enter ROSS"
"The worthy thane of Ross."
"What a haste looks through his eyes! So should he look"
"That seems to speak things strange."
"God save the king!"
"Whence camest thou, worthy thane?"
"From Fife, great king,"
"Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky"
"And fan our people cold. Norway himself,"
"With terrible numbers,"
"Assisted by that most disloyal traitor"
"The thane of Cawdor, began a dismal conflict,"
"Till that Bellona's bridegroom, lapp'd in proof,"
"Confronted him with self-comparisons,"
"Point against point rebellious, arm 'gainst arm."
"Curbing his lavish spirit: and, to conclude,"
"The victory fell on us."
"Great happiness!"
"That now"
"Sweno, the Norways' king, craves composition:"
"Nor would we deign him burial of his men"
"Till he disbursed at Saint Colme's inch"
"Ten thousand dollars to our general use."
"No more that thane of Cawdor shall deceive"
"Our bosom interest: go pronounce his present death,"
"And with his former title greet Macbeth."
"I'll see it done."
"What he hath lost noble Macbeth hath won."
Exeunt
"SCENE III. A heath near Forres."
"Thunder. Enter the three Witches"
"Where hast thou been, sister?"
"Killing swine."
"Sister, where thou?"
"A sailor's wife had chestnuts in her lap,"
"And munch'd, and munch'd, and munch'd:--"
"'Give me,' quoth I:"
"'Aroint thee, witch!' the rump-fed ronyon cries."
"Her husband's to Aleppo gone, master o' the Tiger:"
"But in a sieve I'll thither sail,"
"And, like a rat without a tail,"
"I'll do, I'll do, and I'll do."
"I'll give thee a wind."
"Thou'rt kind."
"And I another."
"I myself have all the other,"
"And the very ports they blow,"
"All the quarters that they know"
"I' the shipman's card."
"I will drain him dry as hay:"
"Sleep shall neither night nor day"
"Hang upon his pent-house lid,"
"He shall live a man forbid:"
"Weary se'nnights nine times nine"
"Shall he dwindle, peak and pine:"
"Though his bark cannot be lost,"
"Yet it shall be tempest-tost."
"Look what I have."
"Show me, show me."
"Here I have a pilot's thumb,"
"Wreck'd as homeward he did come."
"Drum within"
"A drum, a drum!"
"Macbeth doth come."
"The weird sisters, hand in hand,"
"Posters of the sea and land,"
"Thus do go about, about:"
"Thrice to thine and thrice to mine"
"And thrice again, to make up nine."
"Peace! the charm's wound up."
"Enter MACBETH and BANQUO"
"So foul and fair a day I have not seen."
"How far is't call'd to Forres? What are these"
"So wither'd and so wild in their attire,"
"That look not like the inhabitants o' the earth,"
"And yet are on't? Live you? or are you aught"
"That man may question? You seem to understand me,"
"By each at once her chappy finger laying"
"Upon her skinny lips: you should be women,"
"And yet your beards forbid me to interpret"
"That you are so."
"Speak, if you can: what are you?"
"All hail, Macbeth! hail to thee, thane of Glamis!"
"All hail, Macbeth, hail to thee, thane of Cawdor!"
"All hail, Macbeth, thou shalt be king hereafter!"
"Good sir, why do you start, and seem to fear"
"Things that do sound so fair? I' the name of truth,"
"Are ye fantastical, or that indeed"
"Which outwardly ye show? My noble partner"
"You greet with present grace and great prediction"
"Of noble having and of royal hope,"
"That he seems rapt withal: to me you speak not."
"If you can look into the seeds of time,"
"And say which grain will grow and which will not,"
"Speak then to me, who neither beg nor fear"
"Your favours nor your hate."
Hail!
Hail!
Hail!
"Lesser than Macbeth, and greater."
"Not so happy, yet much happier."
"Thou shalt get kings, though thou be none:"
"So all hail, Macbeth and Banquo!"
"Banquo and Macbeth, all hail!"
"Stay, you imperfect speakers, tell me more:"
"By Sinel's death I know I am thane of Glamis,"
"But how of Cawdor? the thane of Cawdor lives,"
"A prosperous gentleman, and to be king"
"Stands not within the prospect of belief,"
"No more than to be Cawdor. Say from whence"
"You owe this strange intelligence? or why"
"Upon this blasted heath you stop our way"
"With such prophetic greeting? Speak, I charge you."
"Witches vanish"
"The earth hath bubbles, as the water has,"
"And these are of them. Whither are they vanish'd?"
"Into the air, and what seem'd corporal melted"
"As breath into the wind. Would they had stay'd!"
"Were such things here as we do speak about?"
"Or have we eaten on the insane root"
"That takes the reason prisoner?"
"Your children shall be kings."
"You shall be king."
"And thane of Cawdor too: went it not so?"
"To the selfsame tune and words. Who's here?"
"Enter ROSS and ANGUS"
"The king hath happily received, Macbeth,"
"The news of thy success, and when he reads"
"Thy personal venture in the rebels' fight,"
"His wonders and his praises do contend"
"Which should be thine or his: silenced with that,"
"In viewing o'er the rest o' the selfsame day,"
"He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks,"
"Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make,"
"Strange images of death. As thick as hail"
"Came post with post, and every one did bear"
"Thy praises in his kingdom's great defence,"
"And pour'd them down before him."
"We are sent"
"To give thee from our royal master thanks,"
"Only to herald thee into his sight,"
"Not pay thee."
"And, for an earnest of a greater honour,"
"He bade me, from him, call thee thane of Cawdor:"
"In which addition, hail, most worthy thane!"
"For it is thine."
"What, can the devil speak true?"
"The thane of Cawdor lives: why do you dress me"
"In borrow'd robes?"
"Who was the thane lives yet,"
"But under heavy judgment bears that life"
"Which he deserves to lose. Whether he was combined"
"With those of Norway, or did line the rebel"
"With hidden help and vantage, or that with both"
"He labour'd in his country's wreck, I know not,"
"But treasons capital, confess'd and proved,"
"Have overthrown him."
"[Aside]  Glamis, and thane of Cawdor!"
"The greatest is behind."
"To ROSS and ANGUS"
"Thanks for your pains."
"To BANQUO"
"Do you not hope your children shall be kings,"
"When those that gave the thane of Cawdor to me"
"Promised no less to them?"
"That trusted home"
"Might yet enkindle you unto the crown,"
"Besides the thane of Cawdor. But 'tis strange:"
"And oftentimes, to win us to our harm,"
"The instruments of darkness tell us truths,"
"Win us with honest trifles, to betray's"
"In deepest consequence."
"Cousins, a word, I pray you."
"[Aside]	Two truths are told,"
"As happy prologues to the swelling act"
"Of the imperial theme.--I thank you, gentlemen."
Aside
"Cannot be ill, cannot be good: if ill,"
"Why hath it given me earnest of success,"
"Commencing in a truth? I am thane of Cawdor:"
"If good, why do I yield to that suggestion"
"Whose horrid image doth unfix my hair"
"And make my seated heart knock at my ribs,"
"Against the use of nature? Present fears"
"Are less than horrible imaginings:"
"My thought, whose murder yet is but fantastical,"
"Shakes so my single state of man that function"
"Is smother'd in surmise, and nothing is"
"But what is not."
"Look, how our partner's rapt."
"[Aside]  If chance will have me king, why, chance may crown me,"
"Without my stir."
"New horrors come upon him,"
"Like our strange garments, cleave not to their mould"
"But with the aid of use."
"[Aside]                Come what come may,"
"Time and the hour runs through the roughest day."
"Worthy Macbeth, we stay upon your leisure."
"Give me your favour: my dull brain was wrought"
"With things forgotten. Kind gentlemen, your pains"
"Are register'd where every day I turn"
"The leaf to read them. Let us toward the king."
"Think upon what hath chanced, and, at more time,"
"The interim having weigh'd it, let us speak"
"Our free hearts each to other."
"Very gladly."
"Till then, enough. Come, friends."
Exeunt
"SCENE IV. Forres. The palace."
"Flourish. Enter DUNCAN, MALCOLM, DONALBAIN, LENNOX, and Attendants"
"Is execution done on Cawdor? Are not"
"Those in commission yet return'd?"
"My liege,"
"They are not yet come back. But I have spoke"
"With one that saw him die: who did report"
"That very frankly he confess'd his treasons,"
"Implored your highness' pardon and set forth"
"A deep repentance: nothing in his life"
"Became him like the leaving it, he died"
"As one that had been studied in his death"
"To throw away the dearest thing he owed,"
"As 'twere a careless trifle."
"There's no art"
"To find the mind's construction in the face:"
"He was a gentleman on whom I built"
"An absolute trust."
"Enter MACBETH, BANQUO, ROSS, and ANGUS"
"O worthiest cousin!"
"The sin of my ingratitude even now"
"Was heavy on me: thou art so far before"
"That swiftest wing of recompense is slow"
"To overtake thee. Would thou hadst less deserved,"
"That the proportion both of thanks and payment"
"Might have been mine! only I have left to say,"
"More is thy due than more than all can pay."
"The service and the loyalty I owe,"
"In doing it, pays itself. Your highness' part"
"Is to receive our duties, and our duties"
"Are to your throne and state children and servants,"
"Which do but what they should, by doing every thing"
"Safe toward your love and honour."
"Welcome hither:"
"I have begun to plant thee, and will labour"
"To make thee full of growing. Noble Banquo,"
"That hast no less deserved, nor must be known"
"No less to have done so, let me enfold thee"
"And hold thee to my heart."
"There if I grow,"
"The harvest is your own."
"My plenteous joys,"
"Wanton in fulness, seek to hide themselves"
"In drops of sorrow. Sons, kinsmen, thanes,"
"And you whose places are the nearest, know"
"We will establish our estate upon"
"Our eldest, Malcolm, whom we name hereafter"
"The Prince of Cumberland, which honour must"
"Not unaccompanied invest him only,"
"But signs of nobleness, like stars, shall shine"
"On all deservers. From hence to Inverness,"
"And bind us further to you."
"The rest is labour, which is not used for you:"
"I'll be myself the harbinger and make joyful"
"The hearing of my wife with your approach,"
"So humbly take my leave."
"My worthy Cawdor!"
"[Aside]  The Prince of Cumberland! that is a step"
"On which I must fall down, or else o'erleap,"
"For in my way it lies. Stars, hide your fires,"
"Let not light see my black and deep desires:"
"The eye wink at the hand, yet let that be,"
"Which the eye fears, when it is done, to see."
Exit
"True, worthy Banquo, he is full so valiant,"
"And in his commendations I am fed,"
"It is a banquet to me. Let's after him,"
"Whose care is gone before to bid us welcome:"
"It is a peerless kinsman."
"Flourish. Exeunt"
"SCENE V. Inverness. Macbeth's castle."
"Enter LADY MACBETH, reading a letter"
"'They met me in the day of success: and I have"
"learned by the perfectest report, they have more in"
"them than mortal knowledge. When I burned in desire"
"to question them further, they made themselves air,"
"into which they vanished. Whiles I stood rapt in"
"the wonder of it, came missives from the king, who"
"all-hailed me 'Thane of Cawdor,' by which title,"
"before, these weird sisters saluted me, and referred"
"me to the coming on of time, with 'Hail, king that"
"shalt be!' This have I thought good to deliver"
"thee, my dearest partner of greatness, that thou"
"mightst not lose the dues of rejoicing, by being"
"ignorant of what greatness is promised thee. Lay it"
"to thy heart, and farewell.'"
"Glamis thou art, and Cawdor, and shalt be"
"What thou art promised: yet do I fear thy nature,"
"It is too full o' the milk of human kindness"
"To catch the nearest way: thou wouldst be great,"
"Art not without ambition, but without"
"The illness should attend it: what thou wouldst highly,"
"That wouldst thou holily, wouldst not play false,"
"And yet wouldst wrongly win: thou'ldst have, great Glamis,"
"That which cries 'Thus thou must do, if thou have it,"
"And that which rather thou dost fear to do"
"Than wishest should be undone.' Hie thee hither,"
"That I may pour my spirits in thine ear,"
"And chastise with the valour of my tongue"
"All that impedes thee from the golden round,"
"Which fate and metaphysical aid doth seem"
"To have thee crown'd withal."
"Enter a Messenger"
"What is your tidings?"
"The king comes here to-night."
"Thou'rt mad to say it:"
"Is not thy master with him? who, were't so,"
"Would have inform'd for preparation."
"So please you, it is true: our thane is coming:"
"One of my fellows had the speed of him,"
"Who, almost dead for breath, had scarcely more"
"Than would make up his message."
"Give him tending,"
"He brings great news."
"Exit Messenger"
"The raven himself is hoarse"
"That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan"
"Under my battlements. Come, you spirits"
"That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here,"
"And fill me from the crown to the toe top-full"
"Of direst cruelty! make thick my blood,"
"Stop up the access and passage to remorse,"
"That no compunctious visitings of nature"
"Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between"
"The effect and it! Come to my woman's breasts,"
"And take my milk for gall, you murdering ministers,"
"Wherever in your sightless substances"
"You wait on nature's mischief! Come, thick night,"
"And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell,"
"That my keen knife see not the wound it makes,"
"Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark,"
"To cry 'Hold, hold!'"
"Enter MACBETH"
"Great Glamis! worthy Cawdor!"
"Greater than both, by the all-hail hereafter!"
"Thy letters have transported me beyond"
"This ignorant present, and I feel now"
"The future in the instant."
"My dearest love,"
"Duncan comes here to-night."
"And when goes hence?"
"To-morrow, as he purposes."
"O, never"
"Shall sun that morrow see!"
"Your face, my thane, is as a book where men"
"May read strange matters. To beguile the time,"
"Look like the time, bear welcome in your eye,"
"Your hand, your tongue: look like the innocent flower,"
"But be the serpent under't. He that's coming"
"Must be provided for: and you shall put"
"This night's great business into my dispatch,"
"Which shall to all our nights and days to come"
"Give solely sovereign sway and masterdom."
"We will speak further."
"Only look up clear,"
"To alter favour ever is to fear:"
"Leave all the rest to me."
Exeunt
"SCENE VI. Before Macbeth's castle."
"Hautboys and torches. Enter DUNCAN, MALCOLM,  DONALBAIN, BANQUO, LENNOX, MACDUFF, ROSS, ANGUS, and Attendants"
"This castle hath a pleasant seat, the air"
"Nimbly and sweetly recommends itself"
"Unto our gentle senses."
"This guest of summer,"
"The temple-haunting martlet, does approve,"
"By his loved mansionry, that the heaven's breath"
"Smells wooingly here: no jutty, frieze,"
"Buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird"
"Hath made his pendent bed and procreant cradle:"
"Where they most breed and haunt, I have observed,"
"The air is delicate."
"Enter LADY MACBETH"
"See, see, our honour'd hostess!"
"The love that follows us sometime is our trouble,"
"Which still we thank as love. Herein I teach you"
"How you shall bid God 'ild us for your pains,"
"And thank us for your trouble."
"All our service"
"In every point twice done and then done double"
"Were poor and single business to contend"
"Against those honours deep and broad wherewith"
"Your majesty loads our house: for those of old,"
"And the late dignities heap'd up to them,"
"We rest your hermits."
"Where's the thane of Cawdor?"
"We coursed him at the heels, and had a purpose"
"To be his purveyor: but he rides well,"
"And his great love, sharp as his spur, hath holp him"
"To his home before us. Fair and noble hostess,"
"We are your guest to-night."
"Your servants ever"
"Have theirs, themselves and what is theirs, in compt,"
"To make their audit at your highness' pleasure,"
"Still to return your own."
"Give me your hand,"
"Conduct me to mine host: we love him highly,"
"And shall continue our graces towards him."
"By your leave, hostess."
Exeunt
"SCENE VII. Macbeth's castle."
"Hautboys and torches. Enter a Sewer, and divers  Servants with dishes and service, and pass over the stage. Then enter MACBETH"
"If it were done when 'tis done, then 'twere well"
"It were done quickly: if the assassination"
"Could trammel up the consequence, and catch"
"With his surcease success, that but this blow"
"Might be the be-all and the end-all here,"
"But here, upon this bank and shoal of time,"
"We'ld jump the life to come. But in these cases"
"We still have judgment here, that we but teach"
"Bloody instructions, which, being taught, return"
"To plague the inventor: this even-handed justice"
"Commends the ingredients of our poison'd chalice"
"To our own lips. He's here in double trust,"
"First, as I am his kinsman and his subject,"
"Strong both against the deed, then, as his host,"
"Who should against his murderer shut the door,"
"Not bear the knife myself. Besides, this Duncan"
"Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been"
"So clear in his great office, that his virtues"
"Will plead like angels, trumpet-tongued, against"
"The deep damnation of his taking-off,"
"And pity, like a naked new-born babe,"
"Striding the blast, or heaven's cherubim, horsed"
"Upon the sightless couriers of the air,"
"Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye,"
"That tears shall drown the wind. I have no spur"
"To prick the sides of my intent, but only"
"Vaulting ambition, which o'erleaps itself"
"And falls on the other."
"Enter LADY MACBETH"
"How now! what news?"
"He has almost supp'd: why have you left the chamber?"
"Hath he ask'd for me?"
"Know you not he has?"
"We will proceed no further in this business:"
"He hath honour'd me of late, and I have bought"
"Golden opinions from all sorts of people,"
"Which would be worn now in their newest gloss,"
"Not cast aside so soon."
"Was the hope drunk"
"Wherein you dress'd yourself? hath it slept since?"
"And wakes it now, to look so green and pale"
"At what it did so freely? From this time"
"Such I account thy love. Art thou afeard"
"To be the same in thine own act and valour"
"As thou art in desire? Wouldst thou have that"
"Which thou esteem'st the ornament of life,"
"And live a coward in thine own esteem,"
"Letting 'I dare not' wait upon 'I would,'"
"Like the poor cat i' the adage?"
"Prithee, peace:"
"I dare do all that may become a man,"
"Who dares do more is none."
"What beast was't, then,"
"That made you break this enterprise to me?"
"When you durst do it, then you were a man,"
"And, to be more than what you were, you would"
"Be so much more the man. Nor time nor place"
"Did then adhere, and yet you would make both:"
"They have made themselves, and that their fitness now"
"Does unmake you. I have given suck, and know"
"How tender 'tis to love the babe that milks me:"
"I would, while it was smiling in my face,"
"Have pluck'd my nipple from his boneless gums,"
"And dash'd the brains out, had I so sworn as you"
"Have done to this."
"If we should fail?"
"We fail!"
"But screw your courage to the sticking-place,"
"And we'll not fail. When Duncan is asleep--"
"Whereto the rather shall his day's hard journey"
"Soundly invite him--his two chamberlains"
"Will I with wine and wassail so convince"
"That memory, the warder of the brain,"
"Shall be a fume, and the receipt of reason"
"A limbeck only: when in swinish sleep"
"Their drenched natures lie as in a death,"
"What cannot you and I perform upon"
"The unguarded Duncan? what not put upon"
"His spongy officers, who shall bear the guilt"
"Of our great quell?"
"Bring forth men-children only,"
"For thy undaunted mettle should compose"
"Nothing but males. Will it not be received,"
"When we have mark'd with blood those sleepy two"
"Of his own chamber and used their very daggers,"
"That they have done't?"
"Who dares receive it other,"
"As we shall make our griefs and clamour roar"
"Upon his death?"
"I am settled, and bend up"
"Each corporal agent to this terrible feat."
"Away, and mock the time with fairest show:"
"False face must hide what the false heart doth know."
Exeunt
"ACT II"
"SCENE I. Court of Macbeth's castle."
"Enter BANQUO, and FLEANCE bearing a torch before him"
"How goes the night, boy?"
"The moon is down, I have not heard the clock."
"And she goes down at twelve."
"I take't, 'tis later, sir."
"Hold, take my sword. There's husbandry in heaven,"
"Their candles are all out. Take thee that too."
"A heavy summons lies like lead upon me,"
"And yet I would not sleep: merciful powers,"
"Restrain in me the cursed thoughts that nature"
"Gives way to in repose!"
"Enter MACBETH, and a Servant with a torch"
"Give me my sword."
"Who's there?"
"A friend."
"What, sir, not yet at rest? The king's a-bed:"
"He hath been in unusual pleasure, and"
"Sent forth great largess to your offices."
"This diamond he greets your wife withal,"
"By the name of most kind hostess, and shut up"
"In measureless content."
"Being unprepared,"
"Our will became the servant to defect,"
"Which else should free have wrought."
"All's well."
"I dreamt last night of the three weird sisters:"
"To you they have show'd some truth."
"I think not of them:"
"Yet, when we can entreat an hour to serve,"
"We would spend it in some words upon that business,"
"If you would grant the time."
"At your kind'st leisure."
"If you shall cleave to my consent, when 'tis,"
"It shall make honour for you."
"So I lose none"
"In seeking to augment it, but still keep"
"My bosom franchised and allegiance clear,"
"I shall be counsell'd."
"Good repose the while!"
"Thanks, sir: the like to you!"
"Exeunt BANQUO and FLEANCE"
"Go bid thy mistress, when my drink is ready,"
"She strike upon the bell. Get thee to bed."
"Exit Servant"
"Is this a dagger which I see before me,"
"The handle toward my hand? Come, let me clutch thee."
"I have thee not, and yet I see thee still."
"Art thou not, fatal vision, sensible"
"To feeling as to sight? or art thou but"
"A dagger of the mind, a false creation,"
"Proceeding from the heat-oppressed brain?"
"I see thee yet, in form as palpable"
"As this which now I draw."
"Thou marshall'st me the way that I was going,"
"And such an instrument I was to use."
"Mine eyes are made the fools o' the other senses,"
"Or else worth all the rest, I see thee still,"
"And on thy blade and dudgeon gouts of blood,"
"Which was not so before. There's no such thing:"
"It is the bloody business which informs"
"Thus to mine eyes. Now o'er the one halfworld"
"Nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abuse"
"The curtain'd sleep, witchcraft celebrates"
"Pale Hecate's offerings, and wither'd murder,"
"Alarum'd by his sentinel, the wolf,"
"Whose howl's his watch, thus with his stealthy pace."
"With Tarquin's ravishing strides, towards his design"
"Moves like a ghost. Thou sure and firm-set earth,"
"Hear not my steps, which way they walk, for fear"
"Thy very stones prate of my whereabout,"
"And take the present horror from the time,"
"Which now suits with it. Whiles I threat, he lives:"
"Words to the heat of deeds too cold breath gives."
"A bell rings"
"I go, and it is done, the bell invites me."
"Hear it not, Duncan, for it is a knell"
"That summons thee to heaven or to hell."
Exit
"SCENE II. The same."
"Enter LADY MACBETH"
"That which hath made them drunk hath made me bold,"
"What hath quench'd them hath given me fire."
"Hark! Peace!"
"It was the owl that shriek'd, the fatal bellman,"
"Which gives the stern'st good-night. He is about it:"
"The doors are open, and the surfeited grooms"
"Do mock their charge with snores: I have drugg'd"
"their possets,"
"That death and nature do contend about them,"
"Whether they live or die."
"[Within]  Who's there? what, ho!"
"Alack, I am afraid they have awaked,"
"And 'tis not done. The attempt and not the deed"
"Confounds us. Hark! I laid their daggers ready,"
"He could not miss 'em. Had he not resembled"
"My father as he slept, I had done't."
"Enter MACBETH"
"My husband!"
"I have done the deed. Didst thou not hear a noise?"
"I heard the owl scream and the crickets cry."
"Did not you speak?"
When?
Now.
"As I descended?"
Ay.
Hark!
"Who lies i' the second chamber?"
Donalbain.
"This is a sorry sight."
"Looking on his hands"
"A foolish thought, to say a sorry sight."
"There's one did laugh in's sleep, and one cried"
'Murder!'
"That they did wake each other: I stood and heard them:"
"But they did say their prayers, and address'd them"
"Again to sleep."
"There are two lodged together."
"One cried 'God bless us!' and 'Amen' the other,"
"As they had seen me with these hangman's hands."
"Listening their fear, I could not say 'Amen,'"
"When they did say 'God bless us!'"
"Consider it not so deeply."
"But wherefore could not I pronounce 'Amen'?"
"I had most need of blessing, and 'Amen'"
"Stuck in my throat."
"These deeds must not be thought"
"After these ways, so, it will make us mad."
"Methought I heard a voice cry 'Sleep no more!"
"Macbeth does murder sleep', the innocent sleep,"
"Sleep that knits up the ravell'd sleeve of care,"
"The death of each day's life, sore labour's bath,"
"Balm of hurt minds, great nature's second course,"
"Chief nourisher in life's feast,--"
"What do you mean?"
"Still it cried 'Sleep no more!' to all the house:"
"'Glamis hath murder'd sleep, and therefore Cawdor"
"Shall sleep no more, Macbeth shall sleep no more.'"
"Who was it that thus cried? Why, worthy thane,"
"You do unbend your noble strength, to think"
"So brainsickly of things. Go get some water,"
"And wash this filthy witness from your hand."
"Why did you bring these daggers from the place?"
"They must lie there: go carry them, and smear"
"The sleepy grooms with blood."
"I'll go no more:"
"I am afraid to think what I have done,"
"Look on't again I dare not."
"Infirm of purpose!"
"Give me the daggers: the sleeping and the dead"
"Are but as pictures: 'tis the eye of childhood"
"That fears a painted devil. If he do bleed,"
"I'll gild the faces of the grooms withal,"
"For it must seem their guilt."
"Exit. Knocking within"
"Whence is that knocking?"
"How is't with me, when every noise appals me?"
"What hands are here? ha! they pluck out mine eyes."
"Will all great Neptune's ocean wash this blood"
"Clean from my hand? No, this my hand will rather"
"The multitudinous seas in incarnadine,"
"Making the green one red."
"Re-enter LADY MACBETH"
"My hands are of your colour, but I shame"
"To wear a heart so white."
"Knocking within"
"I hear a knocking"
"At the south entry: retire we to our chamber,"
"A little water clears us of this deed:"
"How easy is it, then! Your constancy"
"Hath left you unattended."
"Knocking within"
"Hark! more knocking."
"Get on your nightgown, lest occasion call us,"
"And show us to be watchers. Be not lost"
"So poorly in your thoughts."
"To know my deed, 'twere best not know myself."
"Knocking within"
"Wake Duncan with thy knocking! I would thou couldst!"
Exeunt
"SCENE III. The same."
"Knocking within. Enter a Porter"
"Here's a knocking indeed! If a"
"man were porter of hell-gate, he should have"
"old turning the key."
"Knocking within"
Knock,
"knock, knock! Who's there, i' the name of"
"Beelzebub? Here's a farmer, that hanged"
"himself on the expectation of plenty: come in"
"time, have napkins enow about you, here"
"you'll sweat for't."
"Knocking within"
Knock,
"knock! Who's there, in the other devil's"
"name? Faith, here's an equivocator, that could"
"swear in both the scales against either scale,"
"who committed treason enough for God's sake,"
"yet could not equivocate to heaven: O, come"
"in, equivocator."
"Knocking within"
Knock,
"knock, knock! Who's there? Faith, here's an"
"English tailor come hither, for stealing out of"
"a French hose: come in, tailor, here you may"
"roast your goose."
"Knocking within"
Knock,
"knock, never at quiet! What are you? But"
"this place is too cold for hell. I'll devil-porter"
"it no further: I had thought to have let in"
"some of all professions that go the primrose"
"way to the everlasting bonfire."
"Knocking within"
"Anon, anon! I pray you, remember the porter."
"Opens the gate"
"Enter MACDUFF and LENNOX"
"Was it so late, friend, ere you went to bed,"
"That you do lie so late?"
"'Faith sir, we were carousing till the"
"second cock: and drink, sir, is a great"
"provoker of three things."
"What three things does drink especially provoke?"
"Marry, sir, nose-painting, sleep, and"
"urine. Lechery, sir, it provokes, and unprovokes,"
"it provokes the desire, but it takes"
"away the performance: therefore, much drink"
"may be said to be an equivocator with lechery:"
"it makes him, and it mars him, it sets"
"him on, and it takes him off, it persuades him,"
"and disheartens him, makes him stand to, and"
"not stand to, in conclusion, equivocates him"
"in a sleep, and, giving him the lie, leaves him."
"I believe drink gave thee the lie last night."
"That it did, sir, i' the very throat on"
"me: but I requited him for his lie, and, I"
"think, being too strong for him, though he took"
"up my legs sometime, yet I made a shift to cast"
him.
"Is thy master stirring?"
"Enter MACBETH"
"Our knocking has awaked him, here he comes."
"Good morrow, noble sir."
"Good morrow, both."
"Is the king stirring, worthy thane?"
"Not yet."
"He did command me to call timely on him:"
"I have almost slipp'd the hour."
"I'll bring you to him."
"I know this is a joyful trouble to you,"
"But yet 'tis one."
"The labour we delight in physics pain."
"This is the door."
"I'll make so bold to call,"
"For 'tis my limited service."
Exit
"Goes the king hence to-day?"
"He does: he did appoint so."
"The night has been unruly: where we lay,"
"Our chimneys were blown down, and, as they say,"
"Lamentings heard i' the air, strange screams of death,"
"And prophesying with accents terrible"
"Of dire combustion and confused events"
"New hatch'd to the woeful time: the obscure bird"
"Clamour'd the livelong night: some say, the earth"
"Was feverous and did shake."
"'Twas a rough night."
"My young remembrance cannot parallel"
"A fellow to it."
"Re-enter MACDUFF"
"O horror, horror, horror! Tongue nor heart"
"Cannot conceive nor name thee!"
"What's the matter."
"Confusion now hath made his masterpiece!"
"Most sacrilegious murder hath broke ope"
"The Lord's anointed temple, and stole thence"
"The life o' the building!"
"What is 't you say? the life?"
"Mean you his majesty?"
"Approach the chamber, and destroy your sight"
"With a new Gorgon: do not bid me speak,"
"See, and then speak yourselves."
"Exeunt MACBETH and LENNOX"
"Awake, awake!"
"Ring the alarum-bell. Murder and treason!"
"Banquo and Donalbain! Malcolm! awake!"
"Shake off this downy sleep, death's counterfeit,"
"And look on death itself! up, up, and see"
"The great doom's image! Malcolm! Banquo!"
"As from your graves rise up, and walk like sprites,"
"To countenance this horror! Ring the bell."
"Bell rings"
"Enter LADY MACBETH"
"What's the business,"
"That such a hideous trumpet calls to parley"
"The sleepers of the house? speak, speak!"
"O gentle lady,"
"'Tis not for you to hear what I can speak:"
"The repetition, in a woman's ear,"
"Would murder as it fell."
"Enter BANQUO"
"O Banquo, Banquo,"
"Our royal master 's murder'd!"
"Woe, alas!"
"What, in our house?"
"Too cruel any where."
"Dear Duff, I prithee, contradict thyself,"
"And say it is not so."
"Re-enter MACBETH and LENNOX, with ROSS"
"Had I but died an hour before this chance,"
"I had lived a blessed time, for, from this instant,"
"There 's nothing serious in mortality:"
"All is but toys: renown and grace is dead,"
"The wine of life is drawn, and the mere lees"
"Is left this vault to brag of."
"Enter MALCOLM and DONALBAIN"
"What is amiss?"
"You are, and do not know't:"
"The spring, the head, the fountain of your blood"
"Is stopp'd, the very source of it is stopp'd."
"Your royal father 's murder'd."
"O, by whom?"
"Those of his chamber, as it seem'd, had done 't:"
"Their hands and faces were an badged with blood,"
"So were their daggers, which unwiped we found"
"Upon their pillows:"
"They stared, and were distracted, no man's life"
"Was to be trusted with them."
"O, yet I do repent me of my fury,"
"That I did kill them."
"Wherefore did you so?"
"Who can be wise, amazed, temperate and furious,"
"Loyal and neutral, in a moment? No man:"
"The expedition my violent love"
"Outrun the pauser, reason. Here lay Duncan,"
"His silver skin laced with his golden blood,"
"And his gash'd stabs look'd like a breach in nature"
"For ruin's wasteful entrance: there, the murderers,"
"Steep'd in the colours of their trade, their daggers"
"Unmannerly breech'd with gore: who could refrain,"
"That had a heart to love, and in that heart"
"Courage to make 's love kno wn?"
"Help me hence, ho!"
"Look to the lady."
"[Aside to DONALBAIN]  Why do we hold our tongues,"
"That most may claim this argument for ours?"
"[Aside to MALCOLM]  What should be spoken here,"
"where our fate,"
"Hid in an auger-hole, may rush, and seize us?"
"Let 's away,"
"Our tears are not yet brew'd."
"[Aside to DONALBAIN]        Nor our strong sorrow"
"Upon the foot of motion."
"Look to the lady:"
"LADY MACBETH is carried out"
"And when we have our naked frailties hid,"
"That suffer in exposure, let us meet,"
"And question this most bloody piece of work,"
"To know it further. Fears and scruples shake us:"
"In the great hand of God I stand, and thence"
"Against the undivulged pretence I fight"
"Of treasonous malice."
"And so do I."
"So all."
"Let's briefly put on manly readiness,"
"And meet i' the hall together."
"Well contented."
"Exeunt all but Malcolm and Donalbain."
"What will you do? Let's not consort with them:"
"To show an unfelt sorrow is an office"
"Which the false man does easy. I'll to England."
"To Ireland, I, our separated fortune"
"Shall keep us both the safer: where we are,"
"There's daggers in men's smiles: the near in blood,"
"The nearer bloody."
"This murderous shaft that's shot"
"Hath not yet lighted, and our safest way"
"Is to avoid the aim. Therefore, to horse,"
"And let us not be dainty of leave-taking,"
"But shift away: there's warrant in that theft"
"Which steals itself, when there's no mercy left."
Exeunt
"SCENE IV. Outside Macbeth's castle."
"Enter ROSS and an old Man"
"Threescore and ten I can remember well:"
"Within the volume of which time I have seen"
"Hours dreadful and things strange, but this sore night"
"Hath trifled former knowings."
"Ah, good father,"
"Thou seest, the heavens, as troubled with man's act,"
"Threaten his bloody stage: by the clock, 'tis day,"
"And yet dark night strangles the travelling lamp:"
"Is't night's predominance, or the day's shame,"
"That darkness does the face of earth entomb,"
"When living light should kiss it?"
"'Tis unnatural,"
"Even like the deed that's done. On Tuesday last,"
"A falcon, towering in her pride of place,"
"Was by a mousing owl hawk'd at and kill'd."
"And Duncan's horses--a thing most strange and certain--"
"Beauteous and swift, the minions of their race,"
"Turn'd wild in nature, broke their stalls, flung out,"
"Contending 'gainst obedience, as they would make"
"War with mankind."
"'Tis said they eat each other."
"They did so, to the amazement of mine eyes"
"That look'd upon't. Here comes the good Macduff."
"Enter MACDUFF"
"How goes the world, sir, now?"
"Why, see you not?"
"Is't known who did this more than bloody deed?"
"Those that Macbeth hath slain."
"Alas, the day!"
"What good could they pretend?"
"They were suborn'd:"
"Malcolm and Donalbain, the king's two sons,"
"Are stol'n away and fled, which puts upon them"
"Suspicion of the deed."
"'Gainst nature still!"
"Thriftless ambition, that wilt ravin up"
"Thine own life's means! Then 'tis most like"
"The sovereignty will fall upon Macbeth."
"He is already named, and gone to Scone"
"To be invested."
"Where is Duncan's body?"
"Carried to Colmekill,"
"The sacred storehouse of his predecessors,"
"And guardian of their bones."
"Will you to Scone?"
"No, cousin, I'll to Fife."
"Well, I will thither."
"Well, may you see things well done there: adieu!"
"Lest our old robes sit easier than our new!"
"Farewell, father."
"God's benison go with you, and with those"
"That would make good of bad, and friends of foes!"
Exeunt
"ACT III"
"SCENE I. Forres. The palace."
"Enter BANQUO"
"Thou hast it now: king, Cawdor, Glamis, all,"
"As the weird women promised, and, I fear,"
"Thou play'dst most foully for't: yet it was said"
"It should not stand in thy posterity,"
"But that myself should be the root and father"
"Of many kings. If there come truth from them--"
"As upon thee, Macbeth, their speeches shine--"
"Why, by the verities on thee made good,"
"May they not be my oracles as well,"
"And set me up in hope? But hush! no more."
"Sennet sounded. Enter MACBETH, as king, LADY  MACBETH, as queen, LENNOX, ROSS, Lords, Ladies, and Attendants"
"Here's our chief guest."
"If he had been forgotten,"
"It had been as a gap in our great feast,"
"And all-thing unbecoming."
"To-night we hold a solemn supper sir,"
"And I'll request your presence."
"Let your highness"
"Command upon me, to the which my duties"
"Are with a most indissoluble tie"
"For ever knit."
"Ride you this afternoon?"
"Ay, my good lord."
"We should have else desired your good advice,"
"Which still hath been both grave and prosperous,"
"In this day's council, but we'll take to-morrow."
"Is't far you ride?"
"As far, my lord, as will fill up the time"
"'Twixt this and supper: go not my horse the better,"
"I must become a borrower of the night"
"For a dark hour or twain."
"Fail not our feast."
"My lord, I will not."
"We hear, our bloody cousins are bestow'd"
"In England and in Ireland, not confessing"
"Their cruel parricide, filling their hearers"
"With strange invention: but of that to-morrow,"
"When therewithal we shall have cause of state"
"Craving us jointly. Hie you to horse: adieu,"
"Till you return at night. Goes Fleance with you?"
"Ay, my good lord: our time does call upon 's."
"I wish your horses swift and sure of foot,"
"And so I do commend you to their backs. Farewell."
"Exit BANQUO"
"Let every man be master of his time"
"Till seven at night: to make society"
"The sweeter welcome, we will keep ourself"
"Till supper-time alone: while then, God be with you!"
"Exeunt all but MACBETH, and an attendant"
"Sirrah, a word with you: attend those men"
"Our pleasure?"
"They are, my lord, without the palace gate."
"Bring them before us."
"Exit Attendant"
"To be thus is nothing,"
"But to be safely thus.--Our fears in Banquo"
"Stick deep, and in his royalty of nature"
"Reigns that which would be fear'd: 'tis much he dares,"
"And, to that dauntless temper of his mind,"
"He hath a wisdom that doth guide his valour"
"To act in safety. There is none but he"
"Whose being I do fear: and, under him,"
"My Genius is rebuked, as, it is said,"
"Mark Antony's was by Caesar. He chid the sisters"
"When first they put the name of king upon me,"
"And bade them speak to him: then prophet-like"
"They hail'd him father to a line of kings:"
"Upon my head they placed a fruitless crown,"
"And put a barren sceptre in my gripe,"
"Thence to be wrench'd with an unlineal hand,"
"No son of mine succeeding. If 't be so,"
"For Banquo's issue have I filed my mind,"
"For them the gracious Duncan have I murder'd,"
"Put rancours in the vessel of my peace"
"Only for them, and mine eternal jewel"
"Given to the common enemy of man,"
"To make them kings, the seed of Banquo kings!"
"Rather than so, come fate into the list."
"And champion me to the utterance! Who's there!"
"Re-enter Attendant, with two Murderers"
"Now go to the door, and stay there till we call."
"Exit Attendant"
"Was it not yesterday we spoke together?"
"It was, so please your highness."
"Well then, now"
"Have you consider'd of my speeches? Know"
"That it was he in the times past which held you"
"So under fortune, which you thought had been"
"Our innocent self: this I made good to you"
"In our last conference, pass'd in probation with you,"
"How you were borne in hand, how cross'd,"
"the instruments,"
"Who wrought with them, and all things else that might"
"To half a soul and to a notion crazed"
"Say 'Thus did Banquo.'"
"You made it known to us."
"I did so, and went further, which is now"
"Our point of second meeting. Do you find"
"Your patience so predominant in your nature"
"That you can let this go? Are you so gospell'd"
"To pray for this good man and for his issue,"
"Whose heavy hand hath bow'd you to the grave"
"And beggar'd yours for ever?"
"We are men, my liege."
"Ay, in the catalogue ye go for men,"
"As hounds and greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels, curs,"
"Shoughs, water-rugs and demi-wolves, are clept"
"All by the name of dogs: the valued file"
"Distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtle,"
"The housekeeper, the hunter, every one"
"According to the gift which bounteous nature"
"Hath in him closed, whereby he does receive"
"Particular addition. from the bill"
"That writes them all alike: and so of men."
"Now, if you have a station in the file,"
"Not i' the worst rank of manhood, say 't,"
"And I will put that business in your bosoms,"
"Whose execution takes your enemy off,"
"Grapples you to the heart and love of us,"
"Who wear our health but sickly in his life,"
"Which in his death were perfect."
"I am one, my liege,"
"Whom the vile blows and buffets of the world"
"Have so incensed that I am reckless what"
"I do to spite the world."
"And I another"
"So weary with disasters, tugg'd with fortune,"
"That I would set my lie on any chance,"
"To mend it, or be rid on't."
"Both of you"
"Know Banquo was your enemy."
"True, my lord."
"So is he mine, and in such bloody distance,"
"That every minute of his being thrusts"
"Against my near'st of life: and though I could"
"With barefaced power sweep him from my sight"
"And bid my will avouch it, yet I must not,"
"For certain friends that are both his and mine,"
"Whose loves I may not drop, but wail his fall"
"Who I myself struck down, and thence it is,"
"That I to your assistance do make love,"
"Masking the business from the common eye"
"For sundry weighty reasons."
"We shall, my lord,"
"Perform what you command us."
"Though our lives--"
"Your spirits shine through you. Within this hour at most"
"I will advise you where to plant yourselves,"
"Acquaint you with the perfect spy o' the time,"
"The moment on't, for't must be done to-night,"
"And something from the palace, always thought"
"That I require a clearness: and with him--"
"To leave no rubs nor botches in the work--"
"Fleance his son, that keeps him company,"
"Whose absence is no less material to me"
"Than is his father's, must embrace the fate"
"Of that dark hour. Resolve yourselves apart:"
"I'll come to you anon."
"We are resolved, my lord."
"I'll call upon you straight: abide within."
"Exeunt Murderers"
"It is concluded. Banquo, thy soul's flight,"
"If it find heaven, must find it out to-night."
Exit
"SCENE II. The palace."
"Enter LADY MACBETH and a Servant"
"Is Banquo gone from court?"
"Ay, madam, but returns again to-night."
"Say to the king, I would attend his leisure"
"For a few words."
"Madam, I will."
Exit
"Nought's had, all's spent,"
"Where our desire is got without content:"
"'Tis safer to be that which we destroy"
"Than by destruction dwell in doubtful joy."
"Enter MACBETH"
"How now, my lord! why do you keep alone,"
"Of sorriest fancies your companions making,"
"Using those thoughts which should indeed have died"
"With them they think on? Things without all remedy"
"Should be without regard: what's done is done."
"We have scotch'd the snake, not kill'd it:"
"She'll close and be herself, whilst our poor malice"
"Remains in danger of her former tooth."
"But let the frame of things disjoint, both the"
"worlds suffer,"
"Ere we will eat our meal in fear and sleep"
"In the affliction of these terrible dreams"
"That shake us nightly: better be with the dead,"
"Whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace,"
"Than on the torture of the mind to lie"
"In restless ecstasy. Duncan is in his grave,"
"After life's fitful fever he sleeps well,"
"Treason has done his worst: nor steel, nor poison,"
"Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing,"
"Can touch him further."
"Come on,"
"Gentle my lord, sleek o'er your rugged looks,"
"Be bright and jovial among your guests to-night."
"So shall I, love, and so, I pray, be you:"
"Let your remembrance apply to Banquo,"
"Present him eminence, both with eye and tongue:"
"Unsafe the while, that we"
"Must lave our honours in these flattering streams,"
"And make our faces vizards to our hearts,"
"Disguising what they are."
"You must leave this."
"O, full of scorpions is my mind, dear wife!"
"Thou know'st that Banquo, and his Fleance, lives."
"But in them nature's copy's not eterne."
"There's comfort yet, they are assailable,"
"Then be thou jocund: ere the bat hath flown"
"His cloister'd flight, ere to black Hecate's summons"
"The shard-borne beetle with his drowsy hums"
"Hath rung night's yawning peal, there shall be done"
"A deed of dreadful note."
"What's to be done?"
"Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck,"
"Till thou applaud the deed. Come, seeling night,"
"Scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day,"
"And with thy bloody and invisible hand"
"Cancel and tear to pieces that great bond"
"Which keeps me pale! Light thickens, and the crow"
"Makes wing to the rooky wood:"
"Good things of day begin to droop and drowse,"
"While night's black agents to their preys do rouse."
"Thou marvell'st at my words: but hold thee still,"
"Things bad begun make strong themselves by ill."
"So, prithee, go with me."
Exeunt
"SCENE III. A park near the palace."
"Enter three Murderers"
"But who did bid thee join with us?"
Macbeth.
"He needs not our mistrust, since he delivers"
"Our offices and what we have to do"
"To the direction just."
"Then stand with us."
"The west yet glimmers with some streaks of day:"
"Now spurs the lated traveller apace"
"To gain the timely inn, and near approaches"
"The subject of our watch."
"Hark! I hear horses."
"[Within]  Give us a light there, ho!"
"Then 'tis he: the rest"
"That are within the note of expectation"
"Already are i' the court."
"His horses go about."
"Almost a mile: but he does usually,"
"So all men do, from hence to the palace gate"
"Make it their walk."
"A light, a light!"
"Enter BANQUO, and FLEANCE with a torch"
"'Tis he."
"Stand to't."
"It will be rain to-night."
"Let it come down."
"They set upon BANQUO"
"O, treachery! Fly, good Fleance, fly, fly, fly!"
"Thou mayst revenge. O slave!"
"Dies. FLEANCE escapes"
"Who did strike out the light?"
"Wast not the way?"
"There's but one down, the son is fled."
"We have lost"
"Best half of our affair."
"Well, let's away, and say how much is done."
Exeunt
"SCENE IV. The same. Hall in the palace."
"A banquet prepared. Enter MACBETH, LADY MACBETH, ROSS, LENNOX, Lords, and Attendants"
"You know your own degrees, sit down: at first"
"And last the hearty welcome."
"Thanks to your majesty."
"Ourself will mingle with society,"
"And play the humble host."
"Our hostess keeps her state, but in best time"
"We will require her welcome."
"Pronounce it for me, sir, to all our friends,"
"For my heart speaks they are welcome."
"First Murderer appears at the door"
"See, they encounter thee with their hearts' thanks."
"Both sides are even: here I'll sit i' the midst:"
"Be large in mirth, anon we'll drink a measure"
"The table round."
"Approaching the door"
"There's blood on thy face."
"'Tis Banquo's then."
"'Tis better thee without than he within."
"Is he dispatch'd?"
"My lord, his throat is cut, that I did for him."
"Thou art the best o' the cut-throats: yet he's good"
"That did the like for Fleance: if thou didst it,"
"Thou art the nonpareil."
"Most royal sir,"
"Fleance is 'scaped."
"Then comes my fit again: I had else been perfect,"
"Whole as the marble, founded as the rock,"
"As broad and general as the casing air:"
"But now I am cabin'd, cribb'd, confined, bound in"
"To saucy doubts and fears. But Banquo's safe?"
"Ay, my good lord: safe in a ditch he bides,"
"With twenty trenched gashes on his head,"
"The least a death to nature."
"Thanks for that:"
"There the grown serpent lies, the worm that's fled"
"Hath nature that in time will venom breed,"
"No teeth for the present. Get thee gone: to-morrow"
"We'll hear, ourselves, again."
"Exit Murderer"
"My royal lord,"
"You do not give the cheer: the feast is sold"
"That is not often vouch'd, while 'tis a-making,"
"'Tis given with welcome: to feed were best at home,"
"From thence the sauce to meat is ceremony,"
"Meeting were bare without it."
"Sweet remembrancer!"
"Now, good digestion wait on appetite,"
"And health on both!"
"May't please your highness sit."
"The GHOST OF BANQUO enters, and sits in MACBETH's place"
"Here had we now our country's honour roof'd,"
"Were the graced person of our Banquo present,"
"Who may I rather challenge for unkindness"
"Than pity for mischance!"
"His absence, sir,"
"Lays blame upon his promise. Please't your highness"
"To grace us with your royal company."
"The table's full."
"Here is a place reserved, sir."
Where?
"Here, my good lord. What is't that moves your highness?"
"Which of you have done this?"
"What, my good lord?"
"Thou canst not say I did it: never shake"
"Thy gory locks at me."
"Gentlemen, rise: his highness is not well."
"Sit, worthy friends: my lord is often thus,"
"And hath been from his youth: pray you, keep seat,"
"The fit is momentary, upon a thought"
"He will again be well: if much you note him,"
"You shall offend him and extend his passion:"
"Feed, and regard him not. Are you a man?"
"Ay, and a bold one, that dare look on that"
"Which might appal the devil."
"O proper stuff!"
"This is the very painting of your fear:"
"This is the air-drawn dagger which, you said,"
"Led you to Duncan. O, these flaws and starts,"
"Impostors to true fear, would well become"
"A woman's story at a winter's fire,"
"Authorized by her grandam. Shame itself!"
"Why do you make such faces? When all's done,"
"You look but on a stool."
"Prithee, see there! behold! look! lo!"
"how say you?"
"Why, what care I? If thou canst nod, speak too."
"If charnel-houses and our graves must send"
"Those that we bury back, our monuments"
"Shall be the maws of kites."
"GHOST OF BANQUO vanishes"
"What, quite unmann'd in folly?"
"If I stand here, I saw him."
"Fie, for shame!"
"Blood hath been shed ere now, i' the olden time,"
"Ere human statute purged the gentle weal,"
"Ay, and since too, murders have been perform'd"
"Too terrible for the ear: the times have been,"
"That, when the brains were out, the man would die,"
"And there an end, but now they rise again,"
"With twenty mortal murders on their crowns,"
"And push us from our stools: this is more strange"
"Than such a murder is."
"My worthy lord,"
"Your noble friends do lack you."
"I do forget."
"Do not muse at me, my most worthy friends,"
"I have a strange infirmity, which is nothing"
"To those that know me. Come, love and health to all,"
"Then I'll sit down. Give me some wine, fill full."
"I drink to the general joy o' the whole table,"
"And to our dear friend Banquo, whom we miss,"
"Would he were here! to all, and him, we thirst,"
"And all to all."
"Our duties, and the pledge."
"Re-enter GHOST OF BANQUO"
"Avaunt! and quit my sight! let the earth hide thee!"
"Thy bones are marrowless, thy blood is cold,"
"Thou hast no speculation in those eyes"
"Which thou dost glare with!"
"Think of this, good peers,"
"But as a thing of custom: 'tis no other,"
"Only it spoils the pleasure of the time."
"What man dare, I dare:"
"Approach thou like the rugged Russian bear,"
"The arm'd rhinoceros, or the Hyrcan tiger,"
"Take any shape but that, and my firm nerves"
"Shall never tremble: or be alive again,"
"And dare me to the desert with thy sword,"
"If trembling I inhabit then, protest me"
"The baby of a girl. Hence, horrible shadow!"
"Unreal mockery, hence!"
"GHOST OF BANQUO vanishes"
"Why, so: being gone,"
"I am a man again. Pray you, sit still."
"You have displaced the mirth, broke the good meeting,"
"With most admired disorder."
"Can such things be,"
"And overcome us like a summer's cloud,"
"Without our special wonder? You make me strange"
"Even to the disposition that I owe,"
"When now I think you can behold such sights,"
"And keep the natural ruby of your cheeks,"
"When mine is blanched with fear."
"What sights, my lord?"
"I pray you, speak not, he grows worse and worse,"
"Question enrages him. At once, good night:"
"Stand not upon the order of your going,"
"But go at once."
"Good night, and better health"
"Attend his majesty!"
"A kind good night to all!"
"Exeunt all but MACBETH and LADY MACBETH"
"It will have blood, they say, blood will have blood:"
"Stones have been known to move and trees to speak,"
"Augurs and understood relations have"
"By magot-pies and choughs and rooks brought forth"
"The secret'st man of blood. What is the night?"
"Almost at odds with morning, which is which."
"How say'st thou, that Macduff denies his person"
"At our great bidding?"
"Did you send to him, sir?"
"I hear it by the way, but I will send:"
"There's not a one of them but in his house"
"I keep a servant fee'd. I will to-morrow,"
"And betimes I will, to the weird sisters:"
"More shall they speak, for now I am bent to know,"
"By the worst means, the worst. For mine own good,"
"All causes shall give way: I am in blood"
"Stepp'd in so far that, should I wade no more,"
"Returning were as tedious as go o'er:"
"Strange things I have in head, that will to hand,"
"Which must be acted ere they may be scann'd."
"You lack the season of all natures, sleep."
"Come, we'll to sleep. My strange and self-abuse"
"Is the initiate fear that wants hard use:"
"We are yet but young in deed."
Exeunt
"SCENE V. A Heath."
"Thunder. Enter the three Witches meeting HECATE"
"Why, how now, Hecate! you look angerly."
"Have I not reason, beldams as you are,"
"Saucy and overbold? How did you dare"
"To trade and traffic with Macbeth"
"In riddles and affairs of death,"
"And I, the mistress of your charms,"
"The close contriver of all harms,"
"Was never call'd to bear my part,"
"Or show the glory of our art?"
"And, which is worse, all you have done"
"Hath been but for a wayward son,"
"Spiteful and wrathful, who, as others do,"
"Loves for his own ends, not for you."
"But make amends now: get you gone,"
"And at the pit of Acheron"
"Meet me i' the morning: thither he"
"Will come to know his destiny:"
"Your vessels and your spells provide,"
"Your charms and every thing beside."
"I am for the air, this night I'll spend"
"Unto a dismal and a fatal end:"
"Great business must be wrought ere noon:"
"Upon the corner of the moon"
"There hangs a vaporous drop profound,"
"I'll catch it ere it come to ground:"
"And that distill'd by magic sleights"
"Shall raise such artificial sprites"
"As by the strength of their illusion"
"Shall draw him on to his confusion:"
"He shall spurn fate, scorn death, and bear"
"He hopes 'bove wisdom, grace and fear:"
"And you all know, security"
"Is mortals' chiefest enemy."
"Music and a song within: 'Come away, come away,'  and c"
"Hark! I am call'd, my little spirit, see,"
"Sits in a foggy cloud, and stays for me."
Exit
"Come, let's make haste, she'll soon be back again."
Exeunt
"SCENE VI. Forres. The palace."
"Enter LENNOX and another Lord"
"My former speeches have but hit your thoughts,"
"Which can interpret further: only, I say,"
"Things have been strangely borne. The"
"gracious Duncan"
"Was pitied of Macbeth: marry, he was dead:"
"And the right-valiant Banquo walk'd too late,"
"Whom, you may say, if't please you, Fleance kill'd,"
"For Fleance fled: men must not walk too late."
"Who cannot want the thought how monstrous"
"It was for Malcolm and for Donalbain"
"To kill their gracious father? damned fact!"
"How it did grieve Macbeth! did he not straight"
"In pious rage the two delinquents tear,"
"That were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep?"
"Was not that nobly done? Ay, and wisely too,"
"For 'twould have anger'd any heart alive"
"To hear the men deny't. So that, I say,"
"He has borne all things well: and I do think"
"That had he Duncan's sons under his key--"
"As, an't please heaven, he shall not--they"
"should find"
"What 'twere to kill a father, so should Fleance."
"But, peace! for from broad words and 'cause he fail'd"
"His presence at the tyrant's feast, I hear"
"Macduff lives in disgrace: sir, can you tell"
"Where he bestows himself?"
"The son of Duncan,"
"From whom this tyrant holds the due of birth"
"Lives in the English court, and is received"
"Of the most pious Edward with such grace"
"That the malevolence of fortune nothing"
"Takes from his high respect: thither Macduff"
"Is gone to pray the holy king, upon his aid"
"To wake Northumberland and warlike Siward:"
"That, by the help of these--with Him above"
"To ratify the work--we may again"
"Give to our tables meat, sleep to our nights,"
"Free from our feasts and banquets bloody knives,"
"Do faithful homage and receive free honours:"
"All which we pine for now: and this report"
"Hath so exasperate the king that he"
"Prepares for some attempt of war."
"Sent he to Macduff?"
"He did: and with an absolute 'Sir, not I,'"
"The cloudy messenger turns me his back,"
"And hums, as who should say 'You'll rue the time"
"That clogs me with this answer.'"
"And that well might"
"Advise him to a caution, to hold what distance"
"His wisdom can provide. Some holy angel"
"Fly to the court of England and unfold"
"His message ere he come, that a swift blessing"
"May soon return to this our suffering country"
"Under a hand accursed!"
"I'll send my prayers with him."
Exeunt
"ACT IV"
"SCENE I. A cavern. In the middle, a boiling cauldron."
"Thunder. Enter the three Witches"
"Thrice the brinded cat hath mew'd."
"Thrice and once the hedge-pig whined."
"Harpier cries 'Tis time, 'tis time."
"Round about the cauldron go,"
"In the poison'd entrails throw."
"Toad, that under cold stone"
"Days and nights has thirty-one"
"Swelter'd venom sleeping got,"
"Boil thou first i' the charmed pot."
"Double, double toil and trouble,"
"Fire burn, and cauldron bubble."
"Fillet of a fenny snake,"
"In the cauldron boil and bake,"
"Eye of newt and toe of frog,"
"Wool of bat and tongue of dog,"
"Adder's fork and blind-worm's sting,"
"Lizard's leg and owlet's wing,"
"For a charm of powerful trouble,"
"Like a hell-broth boil and bubble."
"Double, double toil and trouble,"
"Fire burn and cauldron bubble."
"Scale of dragon, tooth of wolf,"
"Witches' mummy, maw and gulf"
"Of the ravin'd salt-sea shark,"
"Root of hemlock digg'd i' the dark,"
"Liver of blaspheming Jew,"
"Gall of goat, and slips of yew"
"Silver'd in the moon's eclipse,"
"Nose of Turk and Tartar's lips,"
"Finger of birth-strangled babe"
"Ditch-deliver'd by a drab,"
"Make the gruel thick and slab:"
"Add thereto a tiger's chaudron,"
"For the ingredients of our cauldron."
"Double, double toil and trouble,"
"Fire burn and cauldron bubble."
"Cool it with a baboon's blood,"
"Then the charm is firm and good."
"Enter HECATE to the other three Witches"
"O well done! I commend your pains,"
"And every one shall share i' the gains,"
"And now about the cauldron sing,"
"Live elves and fairies in a ring,"
"Enchanting all that you put in."
"Music and a song: 'Black spirits,'  and c"
"HECATE retires"
"By the pricking of my thumbs,"
"Something wicked this way comes."
"Open, locks,"
"Whoever knocks!"
"Enter MACBETH"
"How now, you secret, black, and midnight hags!"
"What is't you do?"
"A deed without a name."
"I conjure you, by that which you profess,"
"Howe'er you come to know it, answer me:"
"Though you untie the winds and let them fight"
"Against the churches, though the yesty waves"
"Confound and swallow navigation up,"
"Though bladed corn be lodged and trees blown down,"
"Though castles topple on their warders' heads,"
"Though palaces and pyramids do slope"
"Their heads to their foundations, though the treasure"
"Of nature's germens tumble all together,"
"Even till destruction sicken, answer me"
"To what I ask you."
Speak.
Demand.
"We'll answer."
"Say, if thou'dst rather hear it from our mouths,"
"Or from our masters?"
"Call 'em, let me see 'em."
"Pour in sow's blood, that hath eaten"
"Her nine farrow, grease that's sweaten"
"From the murderer's gibbet throw"
"Into the flame."
"Come, high or low,"
"Thyself and office deftly show!"
"Thunder. First Apparition: an armed Head"
"Tell me, thou unknown power,--"
"He knows thy thought:"
"Hear his speech, but say thou nought."
"Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth! beware Macduff,"
"Beware the thane of Fife. Dismiss me. Enough."
Descends
"Whate'er thou art, for thy good caution, thanks,"
"Thou hast harp'd my fear aright: but one"
"word more,--"
"He will not be commanded: here's another,"
"More potent than the first."
"Thunder. Second Apparition: A bloody Child"
"Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth!"
"Had I three ears, I'ld hear thee."
"Be bloody, bold, and resolute, laugh to scorn"
"The power of man, for none of woman born"
"Shall harm Macbeth."
Descends
"Then live, Macduff: what need I fear of thee?"
"But yet I'll make assurance double sure,"
"And take a bond of fate: thou shalt not live,"
"That I may tell pale-hearted fear it lies,"
"And sleep in spite of thunder."
"Thunder. Third Apparition: a Child crowned, with a tree in his hand"
"What is this"
"That rises like the issue of a king,"
"And wears upon his baby-brow the round"
"And top of sovereignty?"
"Listen, but speak not to't."
"Be lion-mettled, proud, and take no care"
"Who chafes, who frets, or where conspirers are:"
"Macbeth shall never vanquish'd be until"
"Great Birnam wood to high Dunsinane hill"
"Shall come against him."
Descends
"That will never be"
"Who can impress the forest, bid the tree"
"Unfix his earth-bound root? Sweet bodements! good!"
"Rebellion's head, rise never till the wood"
"Of Birnam rise, and our high-placed Macbeth"
"Shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath"
"To time and mortal custom. Yet my heart"
"Throbs to know one thing: tell me, if your art"
"Can tell so much: shall Banquo's issue ever"
"Reign in this kingdom?"
"Seek to know no more."
"I will be satisfied: deny me this,"
"And an eternal curse fall on you! Let me know."
"Why sinks that cauldron? and what noise is this?"
Hautboys
Show!
Show!
Show!
"Show his eyes, and grieve his heart,"
"Come like shadows, so depart!"
"A show of Eight Kings, the last with a glass in his hand, GHOST OF BANQUO following"
"Thou art too like the spirit of Banquo: down!"
"Thy crown does sear mine eye-balls. And thy hair,"
"Thou other gold-bound brow, is like the first."
"A third is like the former. Filthy hags!"
"Why do you show me this? A fourth! Start, eyes!"
"What, will the line stretch out to the crack of doom?"
"Another yet! A seventh! I'll see no more:"
"And yet the eighth appears, who bears a glass"
"Which shows me many more, and some I see"
"That two-fold balls and treble scepters carry:"
"Horrible sight! Now, I see, 'tis true,"
"For the blood-bolter'd Banquo smiles upon me,"
"And points at them for his."
"Apparitions vanish"
"What, is this so?"
"Ay, sir, all this is so: but why"
"Stands Macbeth thus amazedly?"
"Come, sisters, cheer we up his sprites,"
"And show the best of our delights:"
"I'll charm the air to give a sound,"
"While you perform your antic round:"
"That this great king may kindly say,"
"Our duties did his welcome pay."
"Music. The witches dance and then vanish, with HECATE"
"Where are they? Gone? Let this pernicious hour"
"Stand aye accursed in the calendar!"
"Come in, without there!"
"Enter LENNOX"
"What's your grace's will?"
"Saw you the weird sisters?"
"No, my lord."
"Came they not by you?"
"No, indeed, my lord."
"Infected be the air whereon they ride,"
"And damn'd all those that trust them! I did hear"
"The galloping of horse: who was't came by?"
"'Tis two or three, my lord, that bring you word"
"Macduff is fled to England."
"Fled to England!"
"Ay, my good lord."
"Time, thou anticipatest my dread exploits:"
"The flighty purpose never is o'ertook"
"Unless the deed go with it, from this moment"
"The very firstlings of my heart shall be"
"The firstlings of my hand. And even now,"
"To crown my thoughts with acts, be it thought and done:"
"The castle of Macduff I will surprise,"
"Seize upon Fife, give to the edge o' the sword"
"His wife, his babes, and all unfortunate souls"
"That trace him in his line. No boasting like a fool,"
"This deed I'll do before this purpose cool."
"But no more sights!--Where are these gentlemen?"
"Come, bring me where they are."
Exeunt
"SCENE II. Fife. Macduff's castle."
"Enter LADY MACDUFF, her Son, and ROSS"
"What had he done, to make him fly the land?"
"You must have patience, madam."
"He had none:"
"His flight was madness: when our actions do not,"
"Our fears do make us traitors."
"You know not"
"Whether it was his wisdom or his fear."
"Wisdom! to leave his wife, to leave his babes,"
"His mansion and his titles in a place"
"From whence himself does fly? He loves us not,"
"He wants the natural touch: for the poor wren,"
"The most diminutive of birds, will fight,"
"Her young ones in her nest, against the owl."
"All is the fear and nothing is the love,"
"As little is the wisdom, where the flight"
"So runs against all reason."
"My dearest coz,"
"I pray you, school yourself: but for your husband,"
"He is noble, wise, judicious, and best knows"
"The fits o' the season. I dare not speak"
"much further,"
"But cruel are the times, when we are traitors"
"And do not know ourselves, when we hold rumour"
"From what we fear, yet know not what we fear,"
"But float upon a wild and violent sea"
"Each way and move. I take my leave of you:"
"Shall not be long but I'll be here again:"
"Things at the worst will cease, or else climb upward"
"To what they were before. My pretty cousin,"
"Blessing upon you!"
"Father'd he is, and yet he's fatherless."
"I am so much a fool, should I stay longer,"
"It would be my disgrace and your discomfort:"
"I take my leave at once."
Exit
"Sirrah, your father's dead,"
"And what will you do now? How will you live?"
"As birds do, mother."
"What, with worms and flies?"
"With what I get, I mean, and so do they."
"Poor bird! thou'ldst never fear the net nor lime,"
"The pitfall nor the gin."
"Why should I, mother? Poor birds they are not set for."
"My father is not dead, for all your saying."
"Yes, he is dead, how wilt thou do for a father?"
"Nay, how will you do for a husband?"
"Why, I can buy me twenty at any market."
"Then you'll buy 'em to sell again."
"Thou speak'st with all thy wit: and yet, i' faith,"
"With wit enough for thee."
"Was my father a traitor, mother?"
"Ay, that he was."
"What is a traitor?"
"Why, one that swears and lies."
"And be all traitors that do so?"
"Every one that does so is a traitor, and must be hanged."
"And must they all be hanged that swear and lie?"
"Every one."
"Who must hang them?"
"Why,  the honest men."
"Then the liars and swearers are fools,"
"for there are liars and swearers enow to beat"
"the honest men and hang up them."
"Now, God help thee, poor monkey!"
"But how wilt thou do for a father?"
"If he were dead, you'ld weep for"
"him: if you would not, it were a good sign"
"that I should quickly have a new father."
"Poor prattler, how thou talk'st!"
"Enter a Messenger"
"Bless you, fair dame! I am not to you known,"
"Though in your state of honour I am perfect."
"I doubt some danger does approach you nearly:"
"If you will take a homely man's advice,"
"Be not found here, hence, with your little ones."
"To fright you thus, methinks, I am too savage,"
"To do worse to you were fell cruelty,"
"Which is too nigh your person. Heaven preserve you!"
"I dare abide no longer."
Exit
"Whither should I fly?"
"I have done no harm. But I remember now"
"I am in this earthly world, where to do harm"
"Is often laudable, to do good sometime"
"Accounted dangerous folly: why then, alas,"
"Do I put up that womanly defence,"
"To say I have done no harm?"
"Enter Murderers"
"What are these faces?"
"Where is your husband?"
"I hope, in no place so unsanctified"
"Where such as thou mayst find him."
"He's a traitor."
"Thou liest, thou shag-hair'd villain!"
"What, you egg!"
"Stabbing him"
"Young fry of treachery!"
"He has kill'd me, mother:"
"Run away, I pray you!"
Dies
"Exit LADY MACDUFF, crying 'Murder!' Exeunt Murderers, following her"
"SCENE III. England. Before the King's palace."
"Enter MALCOLM and MACDUFF"
"Let us seek out some desolate shade, and there"
"Weep our sad bosoms empty."
"Let us rather"
"Hold fast the mortal sword, and like good men"
"Bestride our down-fall'n birthdom: each new morn"
"New widows howl, new orphans cry, new sorrows"
"Strike heaven on the face, that it resounds"
"As if it felt with Scotland and yell'd out"
"Like syllable of dolour."
"What I believe I'll wail,"
"What know believe, and what I can redress,"
"As I shall find the time to friend, I will."
"What you have spoke, it may be so perchance."
"This tyrant, whose sole name blisters our tongues,"
"Was once thought honest: you have loved him well."
"He hath not touch'd you yet. I am young,"
"but something"
"You may deserve of him through me, and wisdom"
"To offer up a weak poor innocent lamb"
"To appease an angry god."
"I am not treacherous."
"But Macbeth is."
"A good and virtuous nature may recoil"
"In an imperial charge. But I shall crave"
"your pardon,"
"That which you are my thoughts cannot transpose:"
"Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell,"
"Though all things foul would wear the brows of grace,"
"Yet grace must still look so."
"I have lost my hopes."
"Perchance even there where I did find my doubts."
"Why in that rawness left you wife and child,"
"Those precious motives, those strong knots of love,"
"Without leave-taking? I pray you,"
"Let not my jealousies be your dishonours,"
"But mine own safeties. You may be rightly just,"
"Whatever I shall think."
"Bleed, bleed, poor country!"
"Great tyranny! lay thou thy basis sure,"
"For goodness dare not cheque thee: wear thou"
"thy wrongs,"
"The title is affeer'd! Fare thee well, lord:"
"I would not be the villain that thou think'st"
"For the whole space that's in the tyrant's grasp,"
"And the rich East to boot."
"Be not offended:"
"I speak not as in absolute fear of you."
"I think our country sinks beneath the yoke,"
"It weeps, it bleeds, and each new day a gash"
"Is added to her wounds: I think withal"
"There would be hands uplifted in my right,"
"And here from gracious England have I offer"
"Of goodly thousands: but, for all this,"
"When I shall tread upon the tyrant's head,"
"Or wear it on my sword, yet my poor country"
"Shall have more vices than it had before,"
"More suffer and more sundry ways than ever,"
"By him that shall succeed."
"What should he be?"
"It is myself I mean: in whom I know"
"All the particulars of vice so grafted"
"That, when they shall be open'd, black Macbeth"
"Will seem as pure as snow, and the poor state"
"Esteem him as a lamb, being compared"
"With my confineless harms."
"Not in the legions"
"Of horrid hell can come a devil more damn'd"
"In evils to top Macbeth."
"I grant him bloody,"
"Luxurious, avaricious, false, deceitful,"
"Sudden, malicious, smacking of every sin"
"That has a name: but there's no bottom, none,"
"In my voluptuousness: your wives, your daughters,"
"Your matrons and your maids, could not fill up"
"The cistern of my lust, and my desire"
"All continent impediments would o'erbear"
"That did oppose my will: better Macbeth"
"Than such an one to reign."
"Boundless intemperance"
"In nature is a tyranny, it hath been"
"The untimely emptying of the happy throne"
"And fall of many kings. But fear not yet"
"To take upon you what is yours: you may"
"Convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty,"
"And yet seem cold, the time you may so hoodwink."
"We have willing dames enough: there cannot be"
"That vulture in you, to devour so many"
"As will to greatness dedicate themselves,"
"Finding it so inclined."
"With this there grows"
"In my most ill-composed affection such"
"A stanchless avarice that, were I king,"
"I should cut off the nobles for their lands,"
"Desire his jewels and this other's house:"
"And my more-having would be as a sauce"
"To make me hunger more, that I should forge"
"Quarrels unjust against the good and loyal,"
"Destroying them for wealth."
"This avarice"
"Sticks deeper, grows with more pernicious root"
"Than summer-seeming lust, and it hath been"
"The sword of our slain kings: yet do not fear,"
"Scotland hath foisons to fill up your will."
"Of your mere own: all these are portable,"
"With other graces weigh'd."
"But I have none: the king-becoming graces,"
"As justice, verity, temperance, stableness,"
"Bounty, perseverance, mercy, lowliness,"
"Devotion, patience, courage, fortitude,"
"I have no relish of them, but abound"
"In the division of each several crime,"
"Acting it many ways. Nay, had I power, I should"
"Pour the sweet milk of concord into hell,"
"Uproar the universal peace, confound"
"All unity on earth."
"O Scotland, Scotland!"
"If such a one be fit to govern, speak:"
"I am as I have spoken."
"Fit to govern!"
"No, not to live. O nation miserable,"
"With an untitled tyrant bloody-scepter'd,"
"When shalt thou see thy wholesome days again,"
"Since that the truest issue of thy throne"
"By his own interdiction stands accursed,"
"And does blaspheme his breed? Thy royal father"
"Was a most sainted king: the queen that bore thee,"
"Oftener upon her knees than on her feet,"
"Died every day she lived. Fare thee well!"
"These evils thou repeat'st upon thyself"
"Have banish'd me from Scotland. O my breast,"
"Thy hope ends here!"
"Macduff, this noble passion,"
"Child of integrity, hath from my soul"
"Wiped the black scruples, reconciled my thoughts"
"To thy good truth and honour. Devilish Macbeth"
"By many of these trains hath sought to win me"
"Into his power, and modest wisdom plucks me"
"From over-credulous haste: but God above"
"Deal between thee and me! for even now"
"I put myself to thy direction, and"
"Unspeak mine own detraction, here abjure"
"The taints and blames I laid upon myself,"
"For strangers to my nature. I am yet"
"Unknown to woman, never was forsworn,"
"Scarcely have coveted what was mine own,"
"At no time broke my faith, would not betray"
"The devil to his fellow and delight"
"No less in truth than life: my first false speaking"
"Was this upon myself: what I am truly,"
"Is thine and my poor country's to command:"
"Whither indeed, before thy here-approach,"
"Old Siward, with ten thousand warlike men,"
"Already at a point, was setting forth."
"Now we'll together, and the chance of goodness"
"Be like our warranted quarrel! Why are you silent?"
"Such welcome and unwelcome things at once"
"'Tis hard to reconcile."
"Enter a Doctor"
"Well, more anon.--Comes the king forth, I pray you?"
"Ay, sir, there are a crew of wretched souls"
"That stay his cure: their malady convinces"
"The great assay of art, but at his touch--"
"Such sanctity hath heaven given his hand--"
"They presently amend."
"I thank you, doctor."
"Exit Doctor"
"What's the disease he means?"
"'Tis call'd the evil:"
"A most miraculous work in this good king,"
"Which often, since my here-remain in England,"
"I have seen him do. How he solicits heaven,"
"Himself best knows: but strangely-visited people,"
"All swoln and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye,"
"The mere despair of surgery, he cures,"
"Hanging a golden stamp about their necks,"
"Put on with holy prayers: and 'tis spoken,"
"To the succeeding royalty he leaves"
"The healing benediction. With this strange virtue,"
"He hath a heavenly gift of prophecy,"
"And sundry blessings hang about his throne,"
"That speak him full of grace."
"Enter ROSS"
"See, who comes here?"
"My countryman, but yet I know him not."
"My ever-gentle cousin, welcome hither."
"I know him now. Good God, betimes remove"
"The means that makes us strangers!"
"Sir, amen."
"Stands Scotland where it did?"
"Alas, poor country!"
"Almost afraid to know itself. It cannot"
"Be call'd our mother, but our grave, where nothing,"
"But who knows nothing, is once seen to smile,"
"Where sighs and groans and shrieks that rend the air"
"Are made, not mark'd, where violent sorrow seems"
"A modern ecstasy, the dead man's knell"
"Is there scarce ask'd for who, and good men's lives"
"Expire before the flowers in their caps,"
"Dying or ere they sicken."
"O, relation"
"Too nice, and yet too true!"
"What's the newest grief?"
"That of an hour's age doth hiss the speaker:"
"Each minute teems a new one."
"How does my wife?"
"Why, well."
"And all my children?"
"Well too."
"The tyrant has not batter'd at their peace?"
"No, they were well at peace when I did leave 'em."
"But not a niggard of your speech: how goes't?"
"When I came hither to transport the tidings,"
"Which I have heavily borne, there ran a rumour"
"Of many worthy fellows that were out,"
"Which was to my belief witness'd the rather,"
"For that I saw the tyrant's power a-foot:"
"Now is the time of help, your eye in Scotland"
"Would create soldiers, make our women fight,"
"To doff their dire distresses."
"Be't their comfort"
"We are coming thither: gracious England hath"
"Lent us good Siward and ten thousand men,"
"An older and a better soldier none"
"That Christendom gives out."
"Would I could answer"
"This comfort with the like! But I have words"
"That would be howl'd out in the desert air,"
"Where hearing should not latch them."
"What concern they?"
"The general cause? or is it a fee-grief"
"Due to some single breast?"
"No mind that's honest"
"But in it shares some woe, though the main part"
"Pertains to you alone."
"If it be mine,"
"Keep it not from me, quickly let me have it."
"Let not your ears despise my tongue for ever,"
"Which shall possess them with the heaviest sound"
"That ever yet they heard."
"Hum! I guess at it."
"Your castle is surprised, your wife and babes"
"Savagely slaughter'd: to relate the manner,"
"Were, on the quarry of these murder'd deer,"
"To add the death of you."
"Merciful heaven!"
"What, man! ne'er pull your hat upon your brows,"
"Give sorrow words: the grief that does not speak"
"Whispers the o'er-fraught heart and bids it break."
"My children too?"
"Wife, children, servants, all"
"That could be found."
"And I must be from thence!"
"My wife kill'd too?"
"I have said."
"Be comforted:"
"Let's make us medicines of our great revenge,"
"To cure this deadly grief."
"He has no children. All my pretty ones?"
"Did you say all? O hell-kite! All?"
"What, all my pretty chickens and their dam"
"At one fell swoop?"
"Dispute it like a man."
"I shall do so,"
"But I must also feel it as a man:"
"I cannot but remember such things were,"
"That were most precious to me. Did heaven look on,"
"And would not take their part? Sinful Macduff,"
"They were all struck for thee! naught that I am,"
"Not for their own demerits, but for mine,"
"Fell slaughter on their souls. Heaven rest them now!"
"Be this the whetstone of your sword: let grief"
"Convert to anger, blunt not the heart, enrage it."
"O, I could play the woman with mine eyes"
"And braggart with my tongue! But, gentle heavens,"
"Cut short all intermission, front to front"
"Bring thou this fiend of Scotland and myself,"
"Within my sword's length set him, if he 'scape,"
"Heaven forgive him too!"
"This tune goes manly."
"Come, go we to the king, our power is ready,"
"Our lack is nothing but our leave, Macbeth"
"Is ripe for shaking, and the powers above"
"Put on their instruments. Receive what cheer you may:"
"The night is long that never finds the day."
Exeunt
"ACT V"
"SCENE I. Dunsinane. Ante-room in the castle."
"Enter a Doctor of Physic and a Waiting-Gentlewoman"
"I have two nights watched with you, but can perceive"
"no truth in your report. When was it she last walked?"
"Since his majesty went into the field, I have seen"
"her rise from her bed, throw her night-gown upon"
"her, unlock her closet, take forth paper, fold it,"
"write upon't, read it, afterwards seal it, and again"
"return to bed, yet all this while in a most fast sleep."
"A great perturbation in nature, to receive at once"
"the benefit of sleep, and do the effects of"
"watching! In this slumbery agitation, besides her"
"walking and other actual performances, what, at any"
"time, have you heard her say?"
"That, sir, which I will not report after her."
"You may to me: and 'tis most meet you should."
"Neither to you nor any one, having no witness to"
"confirm my speech."
"Enter LADY MACBETH, with a taper"
"Lo you, here she comes! This is her very guise,"
"and, upon my life, fast asleep. Observe her, stand close."
"How came she by that light?"
"Why, it stood by her: she has light by her"
"continually, 'tis her command."
"You see, her eyes are open."
"Ay, but their sense is shut."
"What is it she does now? Look, how she rubs her hands."
"It is an accustomed action with her, to seem thus"
"washing her hands: I have known her continue in"
"this a quarter of an hour."
"Yet here's a spot."
"Hark! she speaks: I will set down what comes from"
"her, to satisfy my remembrance the more strongly."
"Out, damned spot! out, I say!--One: two: why,"
"then, 'tis time to do't.--Hell is murky!--Fie, my"
"lord, fie! a soldier, and afeard? What need we"
"fear who knows it, when none can call our power to"
"account?--Yet who would have thought the old man"
"to have had so much blood in him."
"Do you mark that?"
"The thane of Fife had a wife: where is she now?--"
"What, will these hands ne'er be clean?--No more o'"
"that, my lord, no more o' that: you mar all with"
"this starting."
"Go to, go to, you have known what you should not."
"She has spoke what she should not, I am sure of"
"that: heaven knows what she has known."
"Here's the smell of the blood still: all the"
"perfumes of Arabia will not sweeten this little"
"hand. Oh, oh, oh!"
"What a sigh is there! The heart is sorely charged."
"I would not have such a heart in my bosom for the"
"dignity of the whole body."
"Well, well, well,--"
"Pray God it be, sir."
"This disease is beyond my practise: yet I have known"
"those which have walked in their sleep who have died"
"holily in their beds."
"Wash your hands, put on your nightgown, look not so"
"pale.--I tell you yet again, Banquo's buried, he"
"cannot come out on's grave."
"Even so?"
"To bed, to bed! there's knocking at the gate:"
"come, come, come, come, give me your hand. What's"
"done cannot be undone.--To bed, to bed, to bed!"
Exit
"Will she go now to bed?"
Directly.
"Foul whisperings are abroad: unnatural deeds"
"Do breed unnatural troubles: infected minds"
"To their deaf pillows will discharge their secrets:"
"More needs she the divine than the physician."
"God, God forgive us all! Look after her,"
"Remove from her the means of all annoyance,"
"And still keep eyes upon her. So, good night:"
"My mind she has mated, and amazed my sight."
"I think, but dare not speak."
"Good night, good doctor."
Exeunt
"SCENE II. The country near Dunsinane."
"Drum and colours. Enter MENTEITH, CAITHNESS, ANGUS, LENNOX, and Soldiers"
"The English power is near, led on by Malcolm,"
"His uncle Siward and the good Macduff:"
"Revenges burn in them, for their dear causes"
"Would to the bleeding and the grim alarm"
"Excite the mortified man."
"Near Birnam wood"
"Shall we well meet them, that way are they coming."
"Who knows if Donalbain be with his brother?"
"For certain, sir, he is not: I have a file"
"Of all the gentry: there is Siward's son,"
"And many unrough youths that even now"
"Protest their first of manhood."
"What does the tyrant?"
"Great Dunsinane he strongly fortifies:"
"Some say he's mad, others that lesser hate him"
"Do call it valiant fury: but, for certain,"
"He cannot buckle his distemper'd cause"
"Within the belt of rule."
"Now does he feel"
"His secret murders sticking on his hands,"
"Now minutely revolts upbraid his faith-breach,"
"Those he commands move only in command,"
"Nothing in love: now does he feel his title"
"Hang loose about him, like a giant's robe"
"Upon a dwarfish thief."
"Who then shall blame"
"His pester'd senses to recoil and start,"
"When all that is within him does condemn"
"Itself for being there?"
"Well, march we on,"
"To give obedience where 'tis truly owed:"
"Meet we the medicine of the sickly weal,"
"And with him pour we in our country's purge"
"Each drop of us."
"Or so much as it needs,"
"To dew the sovereign flower and drown the weeds."
"Make we our march towards Birnam."
"Exeunt, marching"
"SCENE III. Dunsinane. A room in the castle."
"Enter MACBETH, Doctor, and Attendants"
"Bring me no more reports, let them fly all:"
"Till Birnam wood remove to Dunsinane,"
"I cannot taint with fear. What's the boy Malcolm?"
"Was he not born of woman? The spirits that know"
"All mortal consequences have pronounced me thus:"
"'Fear not, Macbeth, no man that's born of woman"
"Shall e'er have power upon thee.' Then fly,"
"false thanes,"
"And mingle with the English epicures:"
"The mind I sway by and the heart I bear"
"Shall never sag with doubt nor shake with fear."
"Enter a Servant"
"The devil damn thee black, thou cream-faced loon!"
"Where got'st thou that goose look?"
"There is ten thousand--"
"Geese, villain!"
"Soldiers, sir."
"Go prick thy face, and over-red thy fear,"
"Thou lily-liver'd boy. What soldiers, patch?"
"Death of thy soul! those linen cheeks of thine"
"Are counsellors to fear. What soldiers, whey-face?"
"The English force, so please you."
"Take thy face hence."
"Exit Servant"
"Seyton!--I am sick at heart,"
"When I behold--Seyton, I say!--This push"
"Will cheer me ever, or disseat me now."
"I have lived long enough: my way of life"
"Is fall'n into the sear, the yellow leaf,"
"And that which should accompany old age,"
"As honour, love, obedience, troops of friends,"
"I must not look to have, but, in their stead,"
"Curses, not loud but deep, mouth-honour, breath,"
"Which the poor heart would fain deny, and dare not. Seyton!"
"Enter SEYTON"
"What is your gracious pleasure?"
"What news more?"
"All is confirm'd, my lord, which was reported."
"I'll fight till from my bones my flesh be hack'd."
"Give me my armour."
"'Tis not needed yet."
"I'll put it on."
"Send out more horses, skirr the country round,"
"Hang those that talk of fear. Give me mine armour."
"How does your patient, doctor?"
"Not so sick, my lord,"
"As she is troubled with thick coming fancies,"
"That keep her from her rest."
"Cure her of that."
"Canst thou not minister to a mind diseased,"
"Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow,"
"Raze out the written troubles of the brain"
"And with some sweet oblivious antidote"
"Cleanse the stuff'd bosom of that perilous stuff"
"Which weighs upon the heart?"
"Therein the patient"
"Must minister to himself."
"Throw physic to the dogs, I'll none of it."
"Come, put mine armour on, give me my staff."
"Seyton, send out. Doctor, the thanes fly from me."
"Come, sir, dispatch. If thou couldst, doctor, cast"
"The water of my land, find her disease,"
"And purge it to a sound and pristine health,"
"I would applaud thee to the very echo,"
"That should applaud again.--Pull't off, I say.--"
"What rhubarb, cyme, or what purgative drug,"
"Would scour these English hence? Hear'st thou of them?"
"Ay, my good lord, your royal preparation"
"Makes us hear something."
"Bring it after me."
"I will not be afraid of death and bane,"
"Till Birnam forest come to Dunsinane."
"[Aside]  Were I from Dunsinane away and clear,"
"Profit again should hardly draw me here."
Exeunt
"SCENE IV. Country near Birnam wood."
"Drum and colours. Enter MALCOLM, SIWARD and YOUNG  SIWARD, MACDUFF, MENTEITH, CAITHNESS, ANGUS, LENNOX, ROSS, and Soldiers, marching"
"Cousins, I hope the days are near at hand"
"That chambers will be safe."
"We doubt it nothing."
"What wood is this before us?"
"The wood of Birnam."
"Let every soldier hew him down a bough"
"And bear't before him: thereby shall we shadow"
"The numbers of our host and make discovery"
"Err in report of us."
"It shall be done."
"We learn no other but the confident tyrant"
"Keeps still in Dunsinane, and will endure"
"Our setting down before 't."
"'Tis his main hope:"
"For where there is advantage to be given,"
"Both more and less have given him the revolt,"
"And none serve with him but constrained things"
"Whose hearts are absent too."
"Let our just censures"
"Attend the true event, and put we on"
"Industrious soldiership."
"The time approaches"
"That will with due decision make us know"
"What we shall say we have and what we owe."
"Thoughts speculative their unsure hopes relate,"
"But certain issue strokes must arbitrate:"
"Towards which advance the war."
"Exeunt, marching"
"SCENE V. Dunsinane. Within the castle."
"Enter MACBETH, SEYTON, and Soldiers, with drum and colours"
"Hang out our banners on the outward walls,"
"The cry is still 'They come:' our castle's strength"
"Will laugh a siege to scorn: here let them lie"
"Till famine and the ague eat them up:"
"Were they not forced with those that should be ours,"
"We might have met them dareful, beard to beard,"
"And beat them backward home."
"A cry of women within"
"What is that noise?"
"It is the cry of women, my good lord."
Exit
"I have almost forgot the taste of fears,"
"The time has been, my senses would have cool'd"
"To hear a night-shriek, and my fell of hair"
"Would at a dismal treatise rouse and stir"
"As life were in't: I have supp'd full with horrors,"
"Direness, familiar to my slaughterous thoughts"
"Cannot once start me."
"Re-enter SEYTON"
"Wherefore was that cry?"
"The queen, my lord, is dead."
"She should have died hereafter,"
"There would have been a time for such a word."
"To-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow,"
"Creeps in this petty pace from day to day"
"To the last syllable of recorded time,"
"And all our yesterdays have lighted fools"
"The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle!"
"Life's but a walking shadow, a poor player"
"That struts and frets his hour upon the stage"
"And then is heard no more: it is a tale"
"Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,"
"Signifying nothing."
"Enter a Messenger"
"Thou comest to use thy tongue, thy story quickly."
"Gracious my lord,"
"I should report that which I say I saw,"
"But know not how to do it."
"Well, say, sir."
"As I did stand my watch upon the hill,"
"I look'd toward Birnam, and anon, methought,"
"The wood began to move."
"Liar and slave!"
"Let me endure your wrath, if't be not so:"
"Within this three mile may you see it coming,"
"I say, a moving grove."
"If thou speak'st false,"
"Upon the next tree shalt thou hang alive,"
"Till famine cling thee: if thy speech be sooth,"
"I care not if thou dost for me as much."
"I pull in resolution, and begin"
"To doubt the equivocation of the fiend"
"That lies like truth: 'Fear not, till Birnam wood"
"Do come to Dunsinane:'  and now a wood"
"Comes toward Dunsinane. Arm, arm, and out!"
"If this which he avouches does appear,"
"There is nor flying hence nor tarrying here."
"I gin to be aweary of the sun,"
"And wish the estate o' the world were now undone."
"Ring the alarum-bell! Blow, wind! come, wrack!"
"At least we'll die with harness on our back."
Exeunt
"SCENE VI. Dunsinane. Before the castle."
"Drum and colours. Enter MALCOLM, SIWARD, MACDUFF, and their Army, with boughs"
"Now near enough: your leafy screens throw down."
"And show like those you are. You, worthy uncle,"
"Shall, with my cousin, your right-noble son,"
"Lead our first battle: worthy Macduff and we"
"Shall take upon 's what else remains to do,"
"According to our order."
"Fare you well."
"Do we but find the tyrant's power to-night,"
"Let us be beaten, if we cannot fight."
"Make all our trumpets speak, give them all breath,"
"Those clamorous harbingers of blood and death."
Exeunt
"SCENE VII. Another part of the field."
"Alarums. Enter MACBETH"
"They have tied me to a stake, I cannot fly,"
"But, bear-like, I must fight the course. What's he"
"That was not born of woman? Such a one"
"Am I to fear, or none."
"Enter YOUNG SIWARD"
"What is thy name?"
"Thou'lt be afraid to hear it."
"No, though thou call'st thyself a hotter name"
"Than any is in hell."
"My name's Macbeth."
"The devil himself could not pronounce a title"
"More hateful to mine ear."
"No, nor more fearful."
"Thou liest, abhorred tyrant, with my sword"
"I'll prove the lie thou speak'st."
"They fight and YOUNG SIWARD is slain"
"Thou wast born of woman"
"But swords I smile at, weapons laugh to scorn,"
"Brandish'd by man that's of a woman born."
Exit
"Alarums. Enter MACDUFF"
"That way the noise is. Tyrant, show thy face!"
"If thou be'st slain and with no stroke of mine,"
"My wife and children's ghosts will haunt me still."
"I cannot strike at wretched kerns, whose arms"
"Are hired to bear their staves: either thou, Macbeth,"
"Or else my sword with an unbatter'd edge"
"I sheathe again undeeded. There thou shouldst be,"
"By this great clatter, one of greatest note"
"Seems bruited. Let me find him, fortune!"
"And more I beg not."
"Exit. Alarums"
"Enter MALCOLM and SIWARD"
"This way, my lord, the castle's gently render'd:"
"The tyrant's people on both sides do fight,"
"The noble thanes do bravely in the war,"
"The day almost itself professes yours,"
"And little is to do."
"We have met with foes"
"That strike beside us."
"Enter, sir, the castle."
"Exeunt. Alarums"
"SCENE VIII. Another part of the field."
"Enter MACBETH"
"Why should I play the Roman fool, and die"
"On mine own sword? whiles I see lives, the gashes"
"Do better upon them."
"Enter MACDUFF"
"Turn, hell-hound, turn!"
"Of all men else I have avoided thee:"
"But get thee back, my soul is too much charged"
"With blood of thine already."
"I have no words:"
"My voice is in my sword: thou bloodier villain"
"Than terms can give thee out!"
"They fight"
"Thou losest labour:"
"As easy mayst thou the intrenchant air"
"With thy keen sword impress as make me bleed:"
"Let fall thy blade on vulnerable crests,"
"I bear a charmed life, which must not yield,"
"To one of woman born."
"Despair thy charm,"
"And let the angel whom thou still hast served"
"Tell thee, Macduff was from his mother's womb"
"Untimely ripp'd."
"Accursed be that tongue that tells me so,"
"For it hath cow'd my better part of man!"
"And be these juggling fiends no more believed,"
"That palter with us in a double sense,"
"That keep the word of promise to our ear,"
"And break it to our hope. I'll not fight with thee."
"Then yield thee, coward,"
"And live to be the show and gaze o' the time:"
"We'll have thee, as our rarer monsters are,"
"Painted on a pole, and underwrit,"
"'Here may you see the tyrant.'"
"I will not yield,"
"To kiss the ground before young Malcolm's feet,"
"And to be baited with the rabble's curse."
"Though Birnam wood be come to Dunsinane,"
"And thou opposed, being of no woman born,"
"Yet I will try the last. Before my body"
"I throw my warlike shield. Lay on, Macduff,"
"And damn'd be him that first cries, 'Hold, enough!'"
"Exeunt, fighting. Alarums"
"Retreat. Flourish. Enter, with drum and colours, MALCOLM, SIWARD, ROSS, the other Thanes, and Soldiers"
"I would the friends we miss were safe arrived."
"Some must go off: and yet, by these I see,"
"So great a day as this is cheaply bought."
"Macduff is missing, and your noble son."
"Your son, my lord, has paid a soldier's debt:"
"He only lived but till he was a man,"
"The which no sooner had his prowess confirm'd"
"In the unshrinking station where he fought,"
"But like a man he died."
"Then he is dead?"
"Ay, and brought off the field: your cause of sorrow"
"Must not be measured by his worth, for then"
"It hath no end."
"Had he his hurts before?"
"Ay, on the front."
"Why then, God's soldier be he!"
"Had I as many sons as I have hairs,"
"I would not wish them to a fairer death:"
"And so, his knell is knoll'd."
"He's worth more sorrow,"
"And that I'll spend for him."
"He's worth no more"
"They say he parted well, and paid his score:"
"And so, God be with him! Here comes newer comfort."
"Re-enter MACDUFF, with MACBETH's head"
"Hail, king! for so thou art: behold, where stands"
"The usurper's cursed head: the time is free:"
"I see thee compass'd with thy kingdom's pearl,"
"That speak my salutation in their minds,"
"Whose voices I desire aloud with mine:"
"Hail, King of Scotland!"
"Hail, King of Scotland!"
Flourish
"We shall not spend a large expense of time"
"Before we reckon with your several loves,"
"And make us even with you. My thanes and kinsmen,"
"Henceforth be earls, the first that ever Scotland"
"In such an honour named. What's more to do,"
"Which would be planted newly with the time,"
"As calling home our exiled friends abroad"
"That fled the snares of watchful tyranny,"
"Producing forth the cruel ministers"
"Of this dead butcher and his fiend-like queen,"
"Who, as 'tis thought, by self and violent hands"
"Took off her life, this, and what needful else"
"That calls upon us, by the grace of Grace,"
"We will perform in measure, time and place:"
"So, thanks to all at once and to each one,"
"Whom we invite to see us crown'd at Scone."
"Flourish. Exeunt"
END
"ACT I"
"SCENE I. Elsinore. A platform before the castle."
"FRANCISCO at his post. Enter to him BERNARDO"
"Who's there?"
"Nay, answer me: stand, and unfold yourself."
"Long live the king!"
Bernardo?
He.
"You come most carefully upon your hour."
"'Tis now struck twelve, get thee to bed, Francisco."
"For this relief much thanks: 'tis bitter cold,"
"And I am sick at heart."
"Have you had quiet guard?"
"Not a mouse stirring."
"Well, good night."
"If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus,"
"The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste."
"I think I hear them. Stand, ho! Who's there?"
"Enter HORATIO and MARCELLUS"
"Friends to this ground."
"And liegemen to the Dane."
"Give you good night."
"O, farewell, honest soldier:"
"Who hath relieved you?"
"Bernardo has my place."
"Give you good night."
Exit
"Holla! Bernardo!"
Say,
"What, is Horatio there?"
"A piece of him."
"Welcome, Horatio: welcome, good Marcellus."
"What, has this thing appear'd again to-night?"
"I have seen nothing."
"Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy,"
"And will not let belief take hold of him"
"Touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us:"
"Therefore I have entreated him along"
"With us to watch the minutes of this night,"
"That if again this apparition come,"
"He may approve our eyes and speak to it."
"Tush, tush, 'twill not appear."
"Sit down awhile,"
"And let us once again assail your ears,"
"That are so fortified against our story"
"What we have two nights seen."
"Well, sit we down,"
"And let us hear Bernardo speak of this."
"Last night of all,"
"When yond same star that's westward from the pole"
"Had made his course to illume that part of heaven"
"Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,"
"The bell then beating one,--"
"Enter Ghost"
"Peace, break thee off, look, where it comes again!"
"In the same figure, like the king that's dead."
"Thou art a scholar, speak to it, Horatio."
"Looks it not like the king?  mark it, Horatio."
"Most like: it harrows me with fear and wonder."
"It would be spoke to."
"Question it, Horatio."
"What art thou that usurp'st this time of night,"
"Together with that fair and warlike form"
"In which the majesty of buried Denmark"
"Did sometimes march? by heaven I charge thee, speak!"
"It is offended."
"See, it stalks away!"
"Stay! speak, speak! I charge thee, speak!"
"Exit Ghost"
"'Tis gone, and will not answer."
"How now, Horatio! you tremble and look pale:"
"Is not this something more than fantasy?"
"What think you on't?"
"Before my God, I might not this believe"
"Without the sensible and true avouch"
"Of mine own eyes."
"Is it not like the king?"
"As thou art to thyself:"
"Such was the very armour he had on"
"When he the ambitious Norway combated,"
"So frown'd he once, when, in an angry parle,"
"He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice."
"'Tis strange."
"Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,"
"With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch."
"In what particular thought to work I know not,"
"But in the gross and scope of my opinion,"
"This bodes some strange eruption to our state."
"Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows,"
"Why this same strict and most observant watch"
"So nightly toils the subject of the land,"
"And why such daily cast of brazen cannon,"
"And foreign mart for implements of war,"
"Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task"
"Does not divide the Sunday from the week,"
"What might be toward, that this sweaty haste"
"Doth make the night joint-labourer with the day:"
"Who is't that can inform me?"
"That can I,"
"At least, the whisper goes so. Our last king,"
"Whose image even but now appear'd to us,"
"Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,"
"Thereto prick'd on by a most emulate pride,"
"Dared to the combat, in which our valiant Hamlet--"
"For so this side of our known world esteem'd him--"
"Did slay this Fortinbras, who by a seal'd compact,"
"Well ratified by law and heraldry,"
"Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands"
"Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror:"
"Against the which, a moiety competent"
"Was gaged by our king, which had return'd"
"To the inheritance of Fortinbras,"
"Had he been vanquisher, as, by the same covenant,"
"And carriage of the article design'd,"
"His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,"
"Of unimproved mettle hot and full,"
"Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there"
"Shark'd up a list of lawless resolutes,"
"For food and diet, to some enterprise"
"That hath a stomach in't, which is no other--"
"As it doth well appear unto our state--"
"But to recover of us, by strong hand"
"And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands"
"So by his father lost: and this, I take it,"
"Is the main motive of our preparations,"
"The source of this our watch and the chief head"
"Of this post-haste and romage in the land."
"I think it be no other but e'en so:"
"Well may it sort that this portentous figure"
"Comes armed through our watch, so like the king"
"That was and is the question of these wars."
"A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye."
"In the most high and palmy state of Rome,"
"A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,"
"The graves stood tenantless and the sheeted dead"
"Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets:"
"As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,"
"Disasters in the sun, and the moist star"
"Upon whose influence Neptune's empire stands"
"Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse:"
"And even the like precurse of fierce events,"
"As harbingers preceding still the fates"
"And prologue to the omen coming on,"
"Have heaven and earth together demonstrated"
"Unto our climatures and countrymen.--"
"But soft, behold! lo, where it comes again!"
"Re-enter Ghost"
"I'll cross it, though it blast me. Stay, illusion!"
"If thou hast any sound, or use of voice,"
"Speak to me:"
"If there be any good thing to be done,"
"That may to thee do ease and grace to me,"
"Speak to me:"
"Cock crows"
"If thou art privy to thy country's fate,"
"Which, happily, foreknowing may avoid, O, speak!"
"Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life"
"Extorted treasure in the womb of earth,"
"For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death,"
"Speak of it: stay, and speak! Stop it, Marcellus."
"Shall I strike at it with my partisan?"
"Do, if it will not stand."
"'Tis here!"
"'Tis here!"
"'Tis gone!"
"Exit Ghost"
"We do it wrong, being so majestical,"
"To offer it the show of violence,"
"For it is, as the air, invulnerable,"
"And our vain blows malicious mockery."
"It was about to speak, when the cock crew."
"And then it started like a guilty thing"
"Upon a fearful summons. I have heard,"
"The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,"
"Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat"
"Awake the god of day, and, at his warning,"
"Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,"
"The extravagant and erring spirit hies"
"To his confine: and of the truth herein"
"This present object made probation."
"It faded on the crowing of the cock."
"Some say that ever 'gainst that season comes"
"Wherein our Saviour's birth is celebrated,"
"The bird of dawning singeth all night long:"
"And then, they say, no spirit dares stir abroad,"
"The nights are wholesome, then no planets strike,"
"No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,"
"So hallow'd and so gracious is the time."
"So have I heard and do in part believe it."
"But, look, the morn, in russet mantle clad,"
"Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill:"
"Break we our watch up, and by my advice,"
"Let us impart what we have seen to-night"
"Unto young Hamlet, for, upon my life,"
"This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him."
"Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it,"
"As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?"
"Let's do't, I pray, and I this morning know"
"Where we shall find him most conveniently."
Exeunt
"SCENE II. A room of state in the castle."
"Enter KING CLAUDIUS, QUEEN GERTRUDE, HAMLET,  POLONIUS, LAERTES, VOLTIMAND, CORNELIUS, Lords, and Attendants"
"Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother's death"
"The memory be green, and that it us befitted"
"To bear our hearts in grief and our whole kingdom"
"To be contracted in one brow of woe,"
"Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature"
"That we with wisest sorrow think on him,"
"Together with remembrance of ourselves."
"Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,"
"The imperial jointress to this warlike state,"
"Have we, as 'twere with a defeated joy,--"
"With an auspicious and a dropping eye,"
"With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage,"
"In equal scale weighing delight and dole,--"
"Taken to wife: nor have we herein barr'd"
"Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone"
"With this affair along. For all, our thanks."
"Now follows, that you know, young Fortinbras,"
"Holding a weak supposal of our worth,"
"Or thinking by our late dear brother's death"
"Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,"
"Colleagued with the dream of his advantage,"
"He hath not fail'd to pester us with message,"
"Importing the surrender of those lands"
"Lost by his father, with all bonds of law,"
"To our most valiant brother. So much for him."
"Now for ourself and for this time of meeting:"
"Thus much the business is: we have here writ"
"To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras,--"
"Who, impotent and bed-rid, scarcely hears"
"Of this his nephew's purpose,--to suppress"
"His further gait herein, in that the levies,"
"The lists and full proportions, are all made"
"Out of his subject: and we here dispatch"
"You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltimand,"
"For bearers of this greeting to old Norway,"
"Giving to you no further personal power"
"To business with the king, more than the scope"
"Of these delated articles allow."
"Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty."
"In that and all things will we show our duty."
"We doubt it nothing: heartily farewell."
"Exeunt VOLTIMAND and CORNELIUS"
"And now, Laertes, what's the news with you?"
"You told us of some suit, what is't, Laertes?"
"You cannot speak of reason to the Dane,"
"And loose your voice: what wouldst thou beg, Laertes,"
"That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?"
"The head is not more native to the heart,"
"The hand more instrumental to the mouth,"
"Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father."
"What wouldst thou have, Laertes?"
"My dread lord,"
"Your leave and favour to return to France,"
"From whence though willingly I came to Denmark,"
"To show my duty in your coronation,"
"Yet now, I must confess, that duty done,"
"My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France"
"And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon."
"Have you your father's leave? What says Polonius?"
"He hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave"
"By laboursome petition, and at last"
"Upon his will I seal'd my hard consent:"
"I do beseech you, give him leave to go."
"Take thy fair hour, Laertes, time be thine,"
"And thy best graces spend it at thy will!"
"But now, my cousin Hamlet, and my son,--"
"[Aside]  A little more than kin, and less than kind."
"How is it that the clouds still hang on you?"
"Not so, my lord, I am too much i' the sun."
"Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off,"
"And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark."
"Do not for ever with thy vailed lids"
"Seek for thy noble father in the dust:"
"Thou know'st 'tis common, all that lives must die,"
"Passing through nature to eternity."
"Ay, madam, it is common."
"If it be,"
"Why seems it so particular with thee?"
"Seems, madam! nay it is, I know not 'seems.'"
"'Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,"
"Nor customary suits of solemn black,"
"Nor windy suspiration of forced breath,"
"No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,"
"Nor the dejected 'havior of the visage,"
"Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,"
"That can denote me truly: these indeed seem,"
"For they are actions that a man might play:"
"But I have that within which passeth show,"
"These but the trappings and the suits of woe."
"'Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet,"
"To give these mourning duties to your father:"
"But, you must know, your father lost a father,"
"That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound"
"In filial obligation for some term"
"To do obsequious sorrow: but to persever"
"In obstinate condolement is a course"
"Of impious stubbornness, 'tis unmanly grief,"
"It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,"
"A heart unfortified, a mind impatient,"
"An understanding simple and unschool'd:"
"For what we know must be and is as common"
"As any the most vulgar thing to sense,"
"Why should we in our peevish opposition"
"Take it to heart? Fie! 'tis a fault to heaven,"
"A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,"
"To reason most absurd: whose common theme"
"Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,"
"From the first corse till he that died to-day,"
"'This must be so.' We pray you, throw to earth"
"This unprevailing woe, and think of us"
"As of a father: for let the world take note,"
"You are the most immediate to our throne,"
"And with no less nobility of love"
"Than that which dearest father bears his son,"
"Do I impart toward you. For your intent"
"In going back to school in Wittenberg,"
"It is most retrograde to our desire:"
"And we beseech you, bend you to remain"
"Here, in the cheer and comfort of our eye,"
"Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son."
"Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet:"
"I pray thee, stay with us, go not to Wittenberg."
"I shall in all my best obey you, madam."
"Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply:"
"Be as ourself in Denmark. Madam, come,"
"This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet"
"Sits smiling to my heart: in grace whereof,"
"No jocund health that Denmark drinks to-day,"
"But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,"
"And the king's rouse the heavens all bruit again,"
"Re-speaking earthly thunder. Come away."
"Exeunt all but HAMLET"
"O, that this too too solid flesh would melt"
"Thaw and resolve itself into a dew!"
"Or that the Everlasting had not fix'd"
"His canon 'gainst self-slaughter! O God! God!"
"How weary, stale, flat and unprofitable,"
"Seem to me all the uses of this world!"
"Fie on't! ah fie! 'tis an unweeded garden,"
"That grows to seed, things rank and gross in nature"
"Possess it merely. That it should come to this!"
"But two months dead: nay, not so much, not two:"
"So excellent a king, that was, to this,"
"Hyperion to a satyr, so loving to my mother"
"That he might not beteem the winds of heaven"
"Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and earth!"
"Must I remember? why, she would hang on him,"
"As if increase of appetite had grown"
"By what it fed on: and yet, within a month--"
"Let me not think on't--Frailty, thy name is woman!--"
"A little month, or ere those shoes were old"
"With which she follow'd my poor father's body,"
"Like Niobe, all tears:--why she, even she--"
"O, God! a beast, that wants discourse of reason,"
"Would have mourn'd longer--married with my uncle,"
"My father's brother, but no more like my father"
"Than I to Hercules: within a month:"
"Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears"
"Had left the flushing in her galled eyes,"
"She married. O, most wicked speed, to post"
"With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!"
"It is not nor it cannot come to good:"
"But break, my heart, for I must hold my tongue."
"Enter HORATIO, MARCELLUS, and BERNARDO"
"Hail to your lordship!"
"I am glad to see you well:"
"Horatio,--or I do forget myself."
"The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever."
"Sir, my good friend, I'll change that name with you:"
"And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio? Marcellus?"
"My good lord--"
"I am very glad to see you. Good even, sir."
"But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?"
"A truant disposition, good my lord."
"I would not hear your enemy say so,"
"Nor shall you do mine ear that violence,"
"To make it truster of your own report"
"Against yourself: I know you are no truant."
"But what is your affair in Elsinore?"
"We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart."
"My lord, I came to see your father's funeral."
"I pray thee, do not mock me, fellow-student,"
"I think it was to see my mother's wedding."
"Indeed, my lord, it follow'd hard upon."
"Thrift, thrift, Horatio! the funeral baked meats"
"Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables."
"Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven"
"Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!"
"My father!--methinks I see my father."
"Where, my lord?"
"In my mind's eye, Horatio."
"I saw him once, he was a goodly king."
"He was a man, take him for all in all,"
"I shall not look upon his like again."
"My lord, I think I saw him yesternight."
"Saw? who?"
"My lord, the king your father."
"The king my father!"
"Season your admiration for awhile"
"With an attent ear, till I may deliver,"
"Upon the witness of these gentlemen,"
"This marvel to you."
"For God's love, let me hear."
"Two nights together had these gentlemen,"
"Marcellus and Bernardo, on their watch,"
"In the dead vast and middle of the night,"
"Been thus encounter'd. A figure like your father,"
"Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pe,"
"Appears before them, and with solemn march"
"Goes slow and stately by them: thrice he walk'd"
"By their oppress'd and fear-surprised eyes,"
"Within his truncheon's length, whilst they, distilled"
"Almost to jelly with the act of fear,"
"Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me"
"In dreadful secrecy impart they did,"
"And I with them the third night kept the watch,"
"Where, as they had deliver'd, both in time,"
"Form of the thing, each word made true and good,"
"The apparition comes: I knew your father,"
"These hands are not more like."
"But where was this?"
"My lord, upon the platform where we watch'd."
"Did you not speak to it?"
"My lord, I did,"
"But answer made it none: yet once methought"
"It lifted up its head and did address"
"Itself to motion, like as it would speak,"
"But even then the morning cock crew loud,"
"And at the sound it shrunk in haste away,"
"And vanish'd from our sight."
"'Tis very strange."
"As I do live, my honour'd lord, 'tis true,"
"And we did think it writ down in our duty"
"To let you know of it."
"Indeed, indeed, sirs, but this troubles me."
"Hold you the watch to-night?"
"We do, my lord."
"Arm'd, say you?"
"Arm'd, my lord."
"From top to toe?"
"My lord, from head to foot."
"Then saw you not his face?"
"O, yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up."
"What, look'd he frowningly?"
"A countenance more in sorrow than in anger."
"Pale or red?"
"Nay, very pale."
"And fix'd his eyes upon you?"
"Most constantly."
"I would I had been there."
"It would have much amazed you."
"Very like, very like. Stay'd it long?"
"While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred."
"Longer, longer."
"Not when I saw't."
"His beard was grizzled--no?"
"It was, as I have seen it in his life,"
"A sable silver'd."
"I will watch to-night,"
"Perchance 'twill walk again."
"I warrant it will."
"If it assume my noble father's person,"
"I'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape"
"And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,"
"If you have hitherto conceal'd this sight,"
"Let it be tenable in your silence still,"
"And whatsoever else shall hap to-night,"
"Give it an understanding, but no tongue:"
"I will requite your loves. So, fare you well:"
"Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,"
"I'll visit you."
"Our duty to your honour."
"Your loves, as mine to you: farewell."
"Exeunt all but HAMLET"
"My father's spirit in arms! all is not well,"
"I doubt some foul play: would the night were come!"
"Till then sit still, my soul: foul deeds will rise,"
"Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's eyes."
Exit
"SCENE III. A room in Polonius' house."
"Enter LAERTES and OPHELIA"
"My necessaries are embark'd: farewell:"
"And, sister, as the winds give benefit"
"And convoy is assistant, do not sleep,"
"But let me hear from you."
"Do you doubt that?"
"For Hamlet and the trifling of his favour,"
"Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood,"
"A violet in the youth of primy nature,"
"Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting,"
"The perfume and suppliance of a minute, No more."
"No more but so?"
"Think it no more,"
"For nature, crescent, does not grow alone"
"In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes,"
"The inward service of the mind and soul"
"Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,"
"And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch"
"The virtue of his will: but you must fear,"
"His greatness weigh'd, his will is not his own,"
"For he himself is subject to his birth:"
"He may not, as unvalued persons do,"
"Carve for himself, for on his choice depends"
"The safety and health of this whole state,"
"And therefore must his choice be circumscribed"
"Unto the voice and yielding of that body"
"Whereof he is the head. Then if he says he loves you,"
"It fits your wisdom so far to believe it"
"As he in his particular act and place"
"May give his saying deed, which is no further"
"Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal."
"Then weigh what loss your honour may sustain,"
"If with too credent ear you list his songs,"
"Or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open"
"To his unmaster'd importunity."
"Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister,"
"And keep you in the rear of your affection,"
"Out of the shot and danger of desire."
"The chariest maid is prodigal enough,"
"If she unmask her beauty to the moon:"
"Virtue itself 'scapes not calumnious strokes:"
"The canker galls the infants of the spring,"
"Too oft before their buttons be disclosed,"
"And in the morn and liquid dew of youth"
"Contagious blastments are most imminent."
"Be wary then, best safety lies in fear:"
"Youth to itself rebels, though none else near."
"I shall the effect of this good lesson keep,"
"As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,"
"Do not, as some ungracious pastors do,"
"Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven,"
"Whiles, like a puff'd and reckless libertine,"
"Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads,"
"And recks not his own rede."
"O, fear me not."
"I stay too long: but here my father comes."
"Enter POLONIUS"
"A double blessing is a double grace,"
"Occasion smiles upon a second leave."
"Yet here, Laertes! aboard, aboard, for shame!"
"The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,"
"And you are stay'd for. There, my blessing with thee!"
"And these few precepts in thy memory"
"See thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,"
"Nor any unproportioned thought his act."
"Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar."
"Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,"
"Grapple them to thy soul with hoops of steel,"
"But do not dull thy palm with entertainment"
"Of each new-hatch'd, unfledged comrade. Beware"
"Of entrance to a quarrel, but being in,"
"Bear't that the opposed may beware of thee."
"Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice,"
"Take each man's censure, but reserve thy judgment."
"Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,"
"But not express'd in fancy, rich, not gaudy,"
"For the apparel oft proclaims the man,"
"And they in France of the best rank and station"
"Are of a most select and generous chief in that."
"Neither a borrower nor a lender be,"
"For loan oft loses both itself and friend,"
"And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry."
"This above all: to thine ownself be true,"
"And it must follow, as the night the day,"
"Thou canst not then be false to any man."
"Farewell: my blessing season this in thee!"
"Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord."
"The time invites you, go, your servants tend."
"Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well"
"What I have said to you."
"'Tis in my memory lock'd,"
"And you yourself shall keep the key of it."
Farewell.
Exit
"What is't, Ophelia, be hath said to you?"
"So please you, something touching the Lord Hamlet."
"Marry, well bethought:"
"'Tis told me, he hath very oft of late"
"Given private time to you, and you yourself"
"Have of your audience been most free and bounteous:"
"If it be so, as so 'tis put on me,"
"And that in way of caution, I must tell you,"
"You do not understand yourself so clearly"
"As it behoves my daughter and your honour."
"What is between you? give me up the truth."
"He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders"
"Of his affection to me."
"Affection! pooh! you speak like a green girl,"
"Unsifted in such perilous circumstance."
"Do you believe his tenders, as you call them?"
"I do not know, my lord, what I should think."
"Marry, I'll teach you: think yourself a baby,"
"That you have ta'en these tenders for true pay,"
"Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly,"
"Or--not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,"
"Running it thus--you'll tender me a fool."
"My lord, he hath importuned me with love"
"In honourable fashion."
"Ay, fashion you may call it, go to, go to."
"And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,"
"With almost all the holy vows of heaven."
"Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know,"
"When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul"
"Lends the tongue vows: these blazes, daughter,"
"Giving more light than heat, extinct in both,"
"Even in their promise, as it is a-making,"
"You must not take for fire. From this time"
"Be somewhat scanter of your maiden presence,"
"Set your entreatments at a higher rate"
"Than a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet,"
"Believe so much in him, that he is young"
"And with a larger tether may he walk"
"Than may be given you: in few, Ophelia,"
"Do not believe his vows, for they are brokers,"
"Not of that dye which their investments show,"
"But mere implorators of unholy suits,"
"Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds,"
"The better to beguile. This is for all:"
"I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth,"
"Have you so slander any moment leisure,"
"As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet."
"Look to't, I charge you: come your ways."
"I shall obey, my lord."
Exeunt
"SCENE IV. The platform."
"Enter HAMLET, HORATIO, and MARCELLUS"
"The air bites shrewdly, it is very cold."
"It is a nipping and an eager air."
"What hour now?"
"I think it lacks of twelve."
"No, it is struck."
"Indeed? I heard it not: then it draws near the season"
"Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk."
"A flourish of trumpets, and ordnance shot off, within"
"What does this mean, my lord?"
"The king doth wake to-night and takes his rouse,"
"Keeps wassail, and the swaggering up-spring reels,"
"And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,"
"The kettle-drum and trumpet thus bray out"
"The triumph of his pledge."
"Is it a custom?"
"Ay, marry, is't:"
"But to my mind, though I am native here"
"And to the manner born, it is a custom"
"More honour'd in the breach than the observance."
"This heavy-headed revel east and west"
"Makes us traduced and tax'd of other nations:"
"They clepe us drunkards, and with swinish phrase"
"Soil our addition, and indeed it takes"
"From our achievements, though perform'd at height,"
"The pith and marrow of our attribute."
"So, oft it chances in particular men,"
"That for some vicious mole of nature in them,"
"As, in their birth--wherein they are not guilty,"
"Since nature cannot choose his origin--"
"By the o'ergrowth of some complexion,"
"Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason,"
"Or by some habit that too much o'er-leavens"
"The form of plausive manners, that these men,"
"Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,"
"Being nature's livery, or fortune's star,--"
"Their virtues else--be they as pure as grace,"
"As infinite as man may undergo--"
"Shall in the general censure take corruption"
"From that particular fault: the dram of eale"
"Doth all the noble substance of a doubt"
"To his own scandal."
"Look, my lord, it comes!"
"Enter Ghost"
"Angels and ministers of grace defend us!"
"Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damn'd,"
"Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell,"
"Be thy intents wicked or charitable,"
"Thou comest in such a questionable shape"
"That I will speak to thee: I'll call thee Hamlet,"
"King, father, royal Dane: O, answer me!"
"Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell"
"Why thy canonized bones, hearsed in death,"
"Have burst their cerements, why the sepulchre,"
"Wherein we saw thee quietly inurn'd,"
"Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws,"
"To cast thee up again. What may this mean,"
"That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel"
"Revisit'st thus the glimpses of the moon,"
"Making night hideous, and we fools of nature"
"So horridly to shake our disposition"
"With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?"
"Say, why is this? wherefore? what should we do?"
"Ghost beckons HAMLET"
"It beckons you to go away with it,"
"As if it some impartment did desire"
"To you alone."
"Look, with what courteous action"
"It waves you to a more removed ground:"
"But do not go with it."
"No, by no means."
"It will not speak, then I will follow it."
"Do not, my lord."
"Why, what should be the fear?"
"I do not set my life in a pin's fee,"
"And for my soul, what can it do to that,"
"Being a thing immortal as itself?"
"It waves me forth again: I'll follow it."
"What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord,"
"Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff"
"That beetles o'er his base into the sea,"
"And there assume some other horrible form,"
"Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason"
"And draw you into madness? think of it:"
"The very place puts toys of desperation,"
"Without more motive, into every brain"
"That looks so many fathoms to the sea"
"And hears it roar beneath."
"It waves me still."
"Go on, I'll follow thee."
"You shall not go, my lord."
"Hold off your hands."
"Be ruled, you shall not go."
"My fate cries out,"
"And makes each petty artery in this body"
"As hardy as the Nemean lion's nerve."
"Still am I call'd. Unhand me, gentlemen."
"By heaven, I'll make a ghost of him that lets me!"
"I say, away! Go on, I'll follow thee."
"Exeunt Ghost and HAMLET"
"He waxes desperate with imagination."
"Let's follow, 'tis not fit thus to obey him."
"Have after. To what issue will this come?"
"Something is rotten in the state of Denmark."
"Heaven will direct it."
"Nay, let's follow him."
Exeunt
"SCENE V. Another part of the platform."
"Enter GHOST and HAMLET"
"Where wilt thou lead me? speak, I'll go no further."
"Mark me."
"I will."
"My hour is almost come,"
"When I to sulphurous and tormenting flames"
"Must render up myself."
"Alas, poor ghost!"
"Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing"
"To what I shall unfold."
"Speak, I am bound to hear."
"So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear."
What?
"I am thy father's spirit,"
"Doom'd for a certain term to walk the night,"
"And for the day confined to fast in fires,"
"Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature"
"Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid"
"To tell the secrets of my prison-house,"
"I could a tale unfold whose lightest word"
"Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,"
"Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres,"
"Thy knotted and combined locks to part"
"And each particular hair to stand on end,"
"Like quills upon the fretful porpentine:"
"But this eternal blazon must not be"
"To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O, list!"
"If thou didst ever thy dear father love--"
"O God!"
"Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder."
Murder!
"Murder most foul, as in the best it is,"
"But this most foul, strange and unnatural."
"Haste me to know't, that I, with wings as swift"
"As meditation or the thoughts of love,"
"May sweep to my revenge."
"I find thee apt,"
"And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed"
"That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,"
"Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear:"
"'Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,"
"A serpent stung me, so the whole ear of Denmark"
"Is by a forged process of my death"
"Rankly abused: but know, thou noble youth,"
"The serpent that did sting thy father's life"
"Now wears his crown."
"O my prophetic soul! My uncle!"
"Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,"
"With witchcraft of his wit, with traitorous gifts,--"
"O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power"
"So to seduce!--won to his shameful lust"
"The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen:"
"O Hamlet, what a falling-off was there!"
"From me, whose love was of that dignity"
"That it went hand in hand even with the vow"
"I made to her in marriage, and to decline"
"Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor"
"To those of mine!"
"But virtue, as it never will be moved,"
"Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,"
"So lust, though to a radiant angel link'd,"
"Will sate itself in a celestial bed,"
"And prey on garbage."
"But, soft! methinks I scent the morning air,"
"Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,"
"My custom always of the afternoon,"
"Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole,"
"With juice of cursed hebenon in a vial,"
"And in the porches of my ears did pour"
"The leperous distilment, whose effect"
"Holds such an enmity with blood of man"
"That swift as quicksilver it courses through"
"The natural gates and alleys of the body,"
"And with a sudden vigour doth posset"
"And curd, like eager droppings into milk,"
"The thin and wholesome blood: so did it mine,"
"And a most instant tetter bark'd about,"
"Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust,"
"All my smooth body."
"Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother's hand"
"Of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatch'd:"
"Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin,"
"Unhousel'd, disappointed, unanel'd,"
"No reckoning made, but sent to my account"
"With all my imperfections on my head:"
"O, horrible! O, horrible! most horrible!"
"If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not,"
"Let not the royal bed of Denmark be"
"A couch for luxury and damned incest."
"But, howsoever thou pursuest this act,"
"Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive"
"Against thy mother aught: leave her to heaven"
"And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge,"
"To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once!"
"The glow-worm shows the matin to be near,"
"And 'gins to pale his uneffectual fire:"
"Adieu, adieu! Hamlet, remember me."
Exit
"O all you host of heaven! O earth! what else?"
"And shall I couple hell? O, fie! Hold, hold, my heart,"
"And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,"
"But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee!"
"Ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a seat"
"In this distracted globe. Remember thee!"
"Yea, from the table of my memory"
"I'll wipe away all trivial fond records,"
"All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past,"
"That youth and observation copied there,"
"And thy commandment all alone shall live"
"Within the book and volume of my brain,"
"Unmix'd with baser matter: yes, by heaven!"
"O most pernicious woman!"
"O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!"
"My tables,--meet it is I set it down,"
"That one may smile, and smile, and be a villain,"
"At least I'm sure it may be so in Denmark:"
Writing
"So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word,"
"It is 'Adieu, adieu! remember me.'"
"I have sworn 't."
"[Within]  My lord, my lord,--"
"[Within]	Lord Hamlet,--"
"[Within]	Heaven secure him!"
"So be it!"
"[Within]  Hillo, ho, ho, my lord!"
"Hillo, ho, ho, boy! come, bird, come."
"Enter HORATIO and MARCELLUS"
"How is't, my noble lord?"
"What news, my lord?"
"O, wonderful!"
"Good my lord, tell it."
"No, you'll reveal it."
"Not I, my lord, by heaven."
"Nor I, my lord."
"How say you, then, would heart of man once think it?"
"But you'll be secret?"
"Ay, by heaven, my lord."
"There's ne'er a villain dwelling in all Denmark"
"But he's an arrant knave."
"There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave"
"To tell us this."
"Why, right, you are i' the right,"
"And so, without more circumstance at all,"
"I hold it fit that we shake hands and part:"
"You, as your business and desire shall point you,"
"For every man has business and desire,"
"Such as it is, and for mine own poor part,"
"Look you, I'll go pray."
"These are but wild and whirling words, my lord."
"I'm sorry they offend you, heartily,"
"Yes, 'faith heartily."
"There's no offence, my lord."
"Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,"
"And much offence too. Touching this vision here,"
"It is an honest ghost, that let me tell you:"
"For your desire to know what is between us,"
"O'ermaster 't as you may. And now, good friends,"
"As you are friends, scholars and soldiers,"
"Give me one poor request."
"What is't, my lord? we will."
"Never make known what you have seen to-night."
"My lord, we will not."
"Nay, but swear't."
"In faith,"
"My lord, not I."
"Nor I, my lord, in faith."
"Upon my sword."
"We have sworn, my lord, already."
"Indeed, upon my sword, indeed."
"[Beneath]  Swear."
"Ah, ha, boy! say'st thou so? art thou there,"
truepenny?
"Come on--you hear this fellow in the cellarage--"
"Consent to swear."
"Propose the oath, my lord."
"Never to speak of this that you have seen,"
"Swear by my sword."
"[Beneath]  Swear."
"Hic et ubique? then we'll shift our ground."
"Come hither, gentlemen,"
"And lay your hands again upon my sword:"
"Never to speak of this that you have heard,"
"Swear by my sword."
"[Beneath]  Swear."
"Well said, old mole! canst work i' the earth so fast?"
"A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends."
"O day and night, but this is wondrous strange!"
"And therefore as a stranger give it welcome."
"There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,"
"Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come,"
"Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,"
"How strange or odd soe'er I bear myself,"
"As I perchance hereafter shall think meet"
"To put an antic disposition on,"
"That you, at such times seeing me, never shall,"
"With arms encumber'd thus, or this headshake,"
"Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,"
"As 'Well, well, we know,' or 'We could, an if we would,'"
"Or 'If we list to speak,' or 'There be, an if they might,'"
"Or such ambiguous giving out, to note"
"That you know aught of me: this not to do,"
"So grace and mercy at your most need help you, Swear."
"[Beneath]  Swear."
"Rest, rest, perturbed spirit!"
"They swear"
"So, gentlemen,"
"With all my love I do commend me to you:"
"And what so poor a man as Hamlet is"
"May do, to express his love and friending to you,"
"God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together,"
"And still your fingers on your lips, I pray."
"The time is out of joint: O cursed spite,"
"That ever I was born to set it right!"
"Nay, come, let's go together."
Exeunt
END
"ACT I"
"SCENE I. Athens. The palace of THESEUS."
"Enter THESEUS, HIPPOLYTA, PHILOSTRATE, and Attendants"
"Now, fair Hippolyta, our nuptial hour"
"Draws on apace, four happy days bring in"
"Another moon: but, O, methinks, how slow"
"This old moon wanes! she lingers my desires,"
"Like to a step-dame or a dowager"
"Long withering out a young man revenue."
"Four days will quickly steep themselves in night,"
"Four nights will quickly dream away the time,"
"And then the moon, like to a silver bow"
"New-bent in heaven, shall behold the night"
"Of our solemnities."
"Go, Philostrate,"
"Stir up the Athenian youth to merriments,"
"Awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth,"
"Turn melancholy forth to funerals,"
"The pale companion is not for our pomp."
"Exit PHILOSTRATE"
"Hippolyta, I woo'd thee with my sword,"
"And won thy love, doing thee injuries,"
"But I will wed thee in another key,"
"With pomp, with triumph and with revelling."
"Enter EGEUS, HERMIA, LYSANDER, and DEMETRIUS"
"Happy be Theseus, our renowned duke!"
"Thanks, good Egeus: what's the news with thee?"
"Full of vexation come I, with complaint"
"Against my child, my daughter Hermia."
"Stand forth, Demetrius. My noble lord,"
"This man hath my consent to marry her."
"Stand forth, Lysander: and my gracious duke,"
"This man hath bewitch'd the bosom of my child,"
"Thou, thou, Lysander, thou hast given her rhymes,"
"And interchanged love-tokens with my child:"
"Thou hast by moonlight at her window sung,"
"With feigning voice verses of feigning love,"
"And stolen the impression of her fantasy"
"With bracelets of thy hair, rings, gawds, conceits,"
"Knacks, trifles, nosegays, sweetmeats, messengers"
"Of strong prevailment in unharden'd youth:"
"With cunning hast thou filch'd my daughter's heart,"
"Turn'd her obedience, which is due to me,"
"To stubborn harshness: and, my gracious duke,"
"Be it so she, will not here before your grace"
"Consent to marry with Demetrius,"
"I beg the ancient privilege of Athens,"
"As she is mine, I may dispose of her:"
"Which shall be either to this gentleman"
"Or to her death, according to our law"
"Immediately provided in that case."
"What say you, Hermia? be advised fair maid:"
"To you your father should be as a god,"
"One that composed your beauties, yea, and one"
"To whom you are but as a form in wax"
"By him imprinted and within his power"
"To leave the figure or disfigure it."
"Demetrius is a worthy gentleman."
"So is Lysander."
"In himself he is,"
"But in this kind, wanting your father's voice,"
"The other must be held the worthier."
"I would my father look'd but with my eyes."
"Rather your eyes must with his judgment look."
"I do entreat your grace to pardon me."
"I know not by what power I am made bold,"
"Nor how it may concern my modesty,"
"In such a presence here to plead my thoughts,"
"But I beseech your grace that I may know"
"The worst that may befall me in this case,"
"If I refuse to wed Demetrius."
"Either to die the death or to abjure"
"For ever the society of men."
"Therefore, fair Hermia, question your desires,"
"Know of your youth, examine well your blood,"
"Whether, if you yield not to your father's choice,"
"You can endure the livery of a nun,"
"For aye to be in shady cloister mew'd,"
"To live a barren sister all your life,"
"Chanting faint hymns to the cold fruitless moon."
"Thrice-blessed they that master so their blood,"
"To undergo such maiden pilgrimage,"
"But earthlier happy is the rose distill'd,"
"Than that which withering on the virgin thorn"
"Grows, lives and dies in single blessedness."
"So will I grow, so live, so die, my lord,"
"Ere I will my virgin patent up"
"Unto his lordship, whose unwished yoke"
"My soul consents not to give sovereignty."
"Take time to pause, and, by the nest new moon--"
"The sealing-day betwixt my love and me,"
"For everlasting bond of fellowship--"
"Upon that day either prepare to die"
"For disobedience to your father's will,"
"Or else to wed Demetrius, as he would,"
"Or on Diana's altar to protest"
"For aye austerity and single life."
"Relent, sweet Hermia: and, Lysander, yield"
"Thy crazed title to my certain right."
"You have her father's love, Demetrius,"
"Let me have Hermia's: do you marry him."
"Scornful Lysander! true, he hath my love,"
"And what is mine my love shall render him."
"And she is mine, and all my right of her"
"I do estate unto Demetrius."
"I am, my lord, as well derived as he,"
"As well possess'd, my love is more than his,"
"My fortunes every way as fairly rank'd,"
"If not with vantage, as Demetrius',"
"And, which is more than all these boasts can be,"
"I am beloved of beauteous Hermia:"
"Why should not I then prosecute my right?"
"Demetrius, I'll avouch it to his head,"
"Made love to Nedar's daughter, Helena,"
"And won her soul, and she, sweet lady, dotes,"
"Devoutly dotes, dotes in idolatry,"
"Upon this spotted and inconstant man."
"I must confess that I have heard so much,"
"And with Demetrius thought to have spoke thereof,"
"But, being over-full of self-affairs,"
"My mind did lose it. But, Demetrius, come,"
"And come, Egeus, you shall go with me,"
"I have some private schooling for you both."
"For you, fair Hermia, look you arm yourself"
"To fit your fancies to your father's will,"
"Or else the law of Athens yields you up--"
"Which by no means we may extenuate--"
"To death, or to a vow of single life."
"Come, my Hippolyta: what cheer, my love?"
"Demetrius and Egeus, go along:"
"I must employ you in some business"
"Against our nuptial and confer with you"
"Of something nearly that concerns yourselves."
"With duty and desire we follow you."
"Exeunt all but LYSANDER and HERMIA"
"How now, my love! why is your cheek so pale?"
"How chance the roses there do fade so fast?"
"Belike for want of rain, which I could well"
"Beteem them from the tempest of my eyes."
"Ay me! for aught that I could ever read,"
"Could ever hear by tale or history,"
"The course of true love never did run smooth,"
"But, either it was different in blood,--"
"O cross! too high to be enthrall'd to low."
"Or else misgraffed in respect of years,--"
"O spite! too old to be engaged to young."
"Or else it stood upon the choice of friends,--"
"O hell! to choose love by another's eyes."
"Or, if there were a sympathy in choice,"
"War, death, or sickness did lay siege to it,"
"Making it momentany as a sound,"
"Swift as a shadow, short as any dream,"
"Brief as the lightning in the collied night,"
"That, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and earth,"
"And ere a man hath power to say 'Behold!'"
"The jaws of darkness do devour it up:"
"So quick bright things come to confusion."
"If then true lovers have been ever cross'd,"
"It stands as an edict in destiny:"
"Then let us teach our trial patience,"
"Because it is a customary cross,"
"As due to love as thoughts and dreams and sighs,"
"Wishes and tears, poor fancy's followers."
"A good persuasion: therefore, hear me, Hermia."
"I have a widow aunt, a dowager"
"Of great revenue, and she hath no child:"
"From Athens is her house remote seven leagues,"
"And she respects me as her only son."
"There, gentle Hermia, may I marry thee,"
"And to that place the sharp Athenian law"
"Cannot pursue us. If thou lovest me then,"
"Steal forth thy father's house to-morrow night,"
"And in the wood, a league without the town,"
"Where I did meet thee once with Helena,"
"To do observance to a morn of May,"
"There will I stay for thee."
"My good Lysander!"
"I swear to thee, by Cupid's strongest bow,"
"By his best arrow with the golden head,"
"By the simplicity of Venus' doves,"
"By that which knitteth souls and prospers loves,"
"And by that fire which burn'd the Carthage queen,"
"When the false Troyan under sail was seen,"
"By all the vows that ever men have broke,"
"In number more than ever women spoke,"
"In that same place thou hast appointed me,"
"To-morrow truly will I meet with thee."
"Keep promise, love. Look, here comes Helena."
"Enter HELENA"
"God speed fair Helena! whither away?"
"Call you me fair? that fair again unsay."
"Demetrius loves your fair: O happy fair!"
"Your eyes are lode-stars, and your tongue's sweet air"
"More tuneable than lark to shepherd's ear,"
"When wheat is green, when hawthorn buds appear."
"Sickness is catching: O, were favour so,"
"Yours would I catch, fair Hermia, ere I go,"
"My ear should catch your voice, my eye your eye,"
"My tongue should catch your tongue's sweet melody."
"Were the world mine, Demetrius being bated,"
"The rest I'd give to be to you translated."
"O, teach me how you look, and with what art"
"You sway the motion of Demetrius' heart."
"I frown upon him, yet he loves me still."
"O that your frowns would teach my smiles such skill!"
"I give him curses, yet he gives me love."
"O that my prayers could such affection move!"
"The more I hate, the more he follows me."
"The more I love, the more he hateth me."
"His folly, Helena, is no fault of mine."
"None, but your beauty: would that fault were mine!"
"Take comfort: he no more shall see my face,"
"Lysander and myself will fly this place."
"Before the time I did Lysander see,"
"Seem'd Athens as a paradise to me:"
"O, then, what graces in my love do dwell,"
"That he hath turn'd a heaven unto a hell!"
"Helen, to you our minds we will unfold:"
"To-morrow night, when Phoebe doth behold"
"Her silver visage in the watery glass,"
"Decking with liquid pearl the bladed grass,"
"A time that lovers' flights doth still conceal,"
"Through Athens' gates have we devised to steal."
"And in the wood, where often you and I"
"Upon faint primrose-beds were wont to lie,"
"Emptying our bosoms of their counsel sweet,"
"There my Lysander and myself shall meet,"
"And thence from Athens turn away our eyes,"
"To seek new friends and stranger companies."
"Farewell, sweet playfellow: pray thou for us,"
"And good luck grant thee thy Demetrius!"
"Keep word, Lysander: we must starve our sight"
"From lovers' food till morrow deep midnight."
"I will, my Hermia."
"Exit HERMIA"
"Helena, adieu:"
"As you on him, Demetrius dote on you!"
Exit
"How happy some o'er other some can be!"
"Through Athens I am thought as fair as she."
"But what of that? Demetrius thinks not so,"
"He will not know what all but he do know:"
"And as he errs, doting on Hermia's eyes,"
"So I, admiring of his qualities:"
"Things base and vile, folding no quantity,"
"Love can transpose to form and dignity:"
"Love looks not with the eyes, but with the mind,"
"And therefore is wing'd Cupid painted blind:"
"Nor hath Love's mind of any judgement taste,"
"Wings and no eyes figure unheedy haste:"
"And therefore is Love said to be a child,"
"Because in choice he is so oft beguiled."
"As waggish boys in game themselves forswear,"
"So the boy Love is perjured every where:"
"For ere Demetrius look'd on Hermia's eyne,"
"He hail'd down oaths that he was only mine,"
"And when this hail some heat from Hermia felt,"
"So he dissolved, and showers of oaths did melt."
"I will go tell him of fair Hermia's flight:"
"Then to the wood will he to-morrow night"
"Pursue her, and for this intelligence"
"If I have thanks, it is a dear expense:"
"But herein mean I to enrich my pain,"
"To have his sight thither and back again."
Exit
"SCENE II. Athens. QUINCE'S house."
"Enter QUINCE, SNUG, BOTTOM, FLUTE, SNOUT, and STARVELING"
"Is all our company here?"
"You were best to call them generally, man by man,"
"according to the scrip."
"Here is the scroll of every man's name, which is"
"thought fit, through all Athens, to play in our"
"interlude before the duke and the duchess, on his"
"wedding-day at night."
"First, good Peter Quince, say what the play treats"
"on, then read the names of the actors, and so grow"
"to a point."
"Marry, our play is, The most lamentable comedy, and"
"most cruel death of Pyramus and Thisby."
"A very good piece of work, I assure you, and a"
"merry. Now, good Peter Quince, call forth your"
"actors by the scroll. Masters, spread yourselves."
"Answer as I call you. Nick Bottom, the weaver."
"Ready. Name what part I am for, and proceed."
"You, Nick Bottom, are set down for Pyramus."
"What is Pyramus? a lover, or a tyrant?"
"A lover, that kills himself most gallant for love."
"That will ask some tears in the true performing of"
"it: if I do it, let the audience look to their"
"eyes, I will move storms, I will condole in some"
"measure. To the rest: yet my chief humour is for a"
"tyrant: I could play Ercles rarely, or a part to"
"tear a cat in, to make all split."
"The raging rocks"
"And shivering shocks"
"Shall break the locks"
"Of prison gates,"
"And Phibbus' car"
"Shall shine from far"
"And make and mar"
"The foolish Fates."
"This was lofty! Now name the rest of the players."
"This is Ercles' vein, a tyrant's vein, a lover is"
"more condoling."
"Francis Flute, the bellows-mender."
"Here, Peter Quince."
"Flute, you must take Thisby on you."
"What is Thisby? a wandering knight?"
"It is the lady that Pyramus must love."
"Nay, faith, let me not play a woman, I have a beard coming."
"That's all one: you shall play it in a mask, and"
"you may speak as small as you will."
"An I may hide my face, let me play Thisby too, I'll"
"speak in a monstrous little voice. 'Thisne,"
"Thisne,' 'Ah, Pyramus, lover dear! thy Thisby dear,"
"and lady dear!'"
"No, no, you must play Pyramus: and, Flute, you Thisby."
"Well, proceed."
"Robin Starveling, the tailor."
"Here, Peter Quince."
"Robin Starveling, you must play Thisby's mother."
"Tom Snout, the tinker."
"Here, Peter Quince."
"You, Pyramus' father: myself, Thisby's father:"
"Snug, the joiner, you, the lion's part: and, I"
"hope, here is a play fitted."
"Have you the lion's part written? pray you, if it"
"be, give it me, for I am slow of study."
"You may do it extempore, for it is nothing but roaring."
"Let me play the lion too: I will roar, that I will"
"do any man's heart good to hear me, I will roar,"
"that I will make the duke say 'Let him roar again,"
"let him roar again.'"
"An you should do it too terribly, you would fright"
"the duchess and the ladies, that they would shriek,"
"and that were enough to hang us all."
"That would hang us, every mother's son."
"I grant you, friends, if that you should fright the"
"ladies out of their wits, they would have no more"
"discretion but to hang us: but I will aggravate my"
"voice so that I will roar you as gently as any"
"sucking dove, I will roar you an 'twere any"
nightingale.
"You can play no part but Pyramus, for Pyramus is a"
"sweet-faced man, a proper man, as one shall see in a"
"summer's day, a most lovely gentleman-like man:"
"therefore you must needs play Pyramus."
"Well, I will undertake it. What beard were I best"
"to play it in?"
"Why, what you will."
"I will discharge it in either your straw-colour"
"beard, your orange-tawny beard, your purple-in-grain"
"beard, or your French-crown-colour beard, your"
"perfect yellow."
"Some of your French crowns have no hair at all, and"
"then you will play bare-faced. But, masters, here"
"are your parts: and I am to entreat you, request"
"you and desire you, to con them by to-morrow night,"
"and meet me in the palace wood, a mile without the"
"town, by moonlight, there will we rehearse, for if"
"we meet in the city, we shall be dogged with"
"company, and our devices known. In the meantime I"
"will draw a bill of properties, such as our play"
"wants. I pray you, fail me not."
"We will meet, and there we may rehearse most"
"obscenely and courageously. Take pains, be perfect: adieu."
"At the duke's oak we meet."
"Enough, hold or cut bow-strings."
Exeunt
"ACT II"
"SCENE I. A wood near Athens."
"Enter, from opposite sides, a Fairy, and PUCK"
"How now, spirit! whither wander you?"
"Over hill, over dale,"
"Thorough bush, thorough brier,"
"Over park, over pale,"
"Thorough flood, thorough fire,"
"I do wander everywhere,"
"Swifter than the moon's sphere,"
"And I serve the fairy queen,"
"To dew her orbs upon the green."
"The cowslips tall her pensioners be:"
"In their gold coats spots you see,"
"Those be rubies, fairy favours,"
"In those freckles live their savours:"
"I must go seek some dewdrops here"
"And hang a pearl in every cowslip's ear."
"Farewell, thou lob of spirits, I'll be gone:"
"Our queen and all our elves come here anon."
"The king doth keep his revels here to-night:"
"Take heed the queen come not within his sight,"
"For Oberon is passing fell and wrath,"
"Because that she as her attendant hath"
"A lovely boy, stolen from an Indian king,"
"She never had so sweet a changeling,"
"And jealous Oberon would have the child"
"Knight of his train, to trace the forests wild,"
"But she perforce withholds the loved boy,"
"Crowns him with flowers and makes him all her joy:"
"And now they never meet in grove or green,"
"By fountain clear, or spangled starlight sheen,"
"But, they do square, that all their elves for fear"
"Creep into acorn-cups and hide them there."
"Either I mistake your shape and making quite,"
"Or else you are that shrewd and knavish sprite"
"Call'd Robin Goodfellow: are not you he"
"That frights the maidens of the villagery,"
"Skim milk, and sometimes labour in the quern"
"And bootless make the breathless housewife churn,"
"And sometime make the drink to bear no barm,"
"Mislead night-wanderers, laughing at their harm?"
"Those that Hobgoblin call you and sweet Puck,"
"You do their work, and they shall have good luck:"
"Are not you he?"
"Thou speak'st aright,"
"I am that merry wanderer of the night."
"I jest to Oberon and make him smile"
"When I a fat and bean-fed horse beguile,"
"Neighing in likeness of a filly foal:"
"And sometime lurk I in a gossip's bowl,"
"In very likeness of a roasted crab,"
"And when she drinks, against her lips I bob"
"And on her wither'd dewlap pour the ale."
"The wisest aunt, telling the saddest tale,"
"Sometime for three-foot stool mistaketh me,"
"Then slip I from her bum, down topples she,"
"And 'tailor' cries, and falls into a cough,"
"And then the whole quire hold their hips and laugh,"
"And waxen in their mirth and neeze and swear"
"A merrier hour was never wasted there."
"But, room, fairy! here comes Oberon."
"And here my mistress. Would that he were gone!"
"Enter, from one side, OBERON, with his train, from the other, TITANIA, with hers"
"Ill met by moonlight, proud Titania."
"What, jealous Oberon! Fairies, skip hence:"
"I have forsworn his bed and company."
"Tarry, rash wanton: am not I thy lord?"
"Then I must be thy lady: but I know"
"When thou hast stolen away from fairy land,"
"And in the shape of Corin sat all day,"
"Playing on pipes of corn and versing love"
"To amorous Phillida. Why art thou here,"
"Come from the farthest Steppe of India?"
"But that, forsooth, the bouncing Amazon,"
"Your buskin'd mistress and your warrior love,"
"To Theseus must be wedded, and you come"
"To give their bed joy and prosperity."
"How canst thou thus for shame, Titania,"
"Glance at my credit with Hippolyta,"
"Knowing I know thy love to Theseus?"
"Didst thou not lead him through the glimmering night"
"From Perigenia, whom he ravished?"
"And make him with fair AEgle break his faith,"
"With Ariadne and Antiopa?"
"These are the forgeries of jealousy:"
"And never, since the middle summer's spring,"
"Met we on hill, in dale, forest or mead,"
"By paved fountain or by rushy brook,"
"Or in the beached margent of the sea,"
"To dance our ringlets to the whistling wind,"
"But with thy brawls thou hast disturb'd our sport."
"Therefore the winds, piping to us in vain,"
"As in revenge, have suck'd up from the sea"
"Contagious fogs, which falling in the land"
"Have every pelting river made so proud"
"That they have overborne their continents:"
"The ox hath therefore stretch'd his yoke in vain,"
"The ploughman lost his sweat, and the green corn"
"Hath rotted ere his youth attain'd a beard,"
"The fold stands empty in the drowned field,"
"And crows are fatted with the murrion flock,"
"The nine men's morris is fill'd up with mud,"
"And the quaint mazes in the wanton green"
"For lack of tread are undistinguishable:"
"The human mortals want their winter here,"
"No night is now with hymn or carol blest:"
"Therefore the moon, the governess of floods,"
"Pale in her anger, washes all the air,"
"That rheumatic diseases do abound:"
"And thorough this distemperature we see"
"The seasons alter: hoary-headed frosts"
"Far in the fresh lap of the crimson rose,"
"And on old Hiems' thin and icy crown"
"An odorous chaplet of sweet summer buds"
"Is, as in mockery, set: the spring, the summer,"
"The childing autumn, angry winter, change"
"Their wonted liveries, and the mazed world,"
"By their increase, now knows not which is which:"
"And this same progeny of evils comes"
"From our debate, from our dissension,"
"We are their parents and original."
"Do you amend it then, it lies in you:"
"Why should Titania cross her Oberon?"
"I do but beg a little changeling boy,"
"To be my henchman."
"Set your heart at rest:"
"The fairy land buys not the child of me."
"His mother was a votaress of my order:"
"And, in the spiced Indian air, by night,"
"Full often hath she gossip'd by my side,"
"And sat with me on Neptune's yellow sands,"
"Marking the embarked traders on the flood,"
"When we have laugh'd to see the sails conceive"
"And grow big-bellied with the wanton wind,"
"Which she, with pretty and with swimming gait"
"Following,--her womb then rich with my young squire,--"
"Would imitate, and sail upon the land,"
"To fetch me trifles, and return again,"
"As from a voyage, rich with merchandise."
"But she, being mortal, of that boy did die,"
"And for her sake do I rear up her boy,"
"And for her sake I will not part with him."
"How long within this wood intend you stay?"
"Perchance till after Theseus' wedding-day."
"If you will patiently dance in our round"
"And see our moonlight revels, go with us,"
"If not, shun me, and I will spare your haunts."
"Give me that boy, and I will go with thee."
"Not for thy fairy kingdom. Fairies, away!"
"We shall chide downright, if I longer stay."
"Exit TITANIA with her train"
"Well, go thy way: thou shalt not from this grove"
"Till I torment thee for this injury."
"My gentle Puck, come hither. Thou rememberest"
"Since once I sat upon a promontory,"
"And heard a mermaid on a dolphin's back"
"Uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath"
"That the rude sea grew civil at her song"
"And certain stars shot madly from their spheres,"
"To hear the sea-maid's music."
"I remember."
"That very time I saw, but thou couldst not,"
"Flying between the cold moon and the earth,"
"Cupid all arm'd: a certain aim he took"
"At a fair vestal throned by the west,"
"And loosed his love-shaft smartly from his bow,"
"As it should pierce a hundred thousand hearts,"
"But I might see young Cupid's fiery shaft"
"Quench'd in the chaste beams of the watery moon,"
"And the imperial votaress passed on,"
"In maiden meditation, fancy-free."
"Yet mark'd I where the bolt of Cupid fell:"
"It fell upon a little western flower,"
"Before milk-white, now purple with love's wound,"
"And maidens call it love-in-idleness."
"Fetch me that flower, the herb I shew'd thee once:"
"The juice of it on sleeping eye-lids laid"
"Will make or man or woman madly dote"
"Upon the next live creature that it sees."
"Fetch me this herb, and be thou here again"
"Ere the leviathan can swim a league."
"I'll put a girdle round about the earth"
"In forty minutes."
Exit
"Having once this juice,"
"I'll watch Titania when she is asleep,"
"And drop the liquor of it in her eyes."
"The next thing then she waking looks upon,"
"Be it on lion, bear, or wolf, or bull,"
"On meddling monkey, or on busy ape,"
"She shall pursue it with the soul of love:"
"And ere I take this charm from off her sight,"
"As I can take it with another herb,"
"I'll make her render up her page to me."
"But who comes here? I am invisible,"
"And I will overhear their conference."
"Enter DEMETRIUS, HELENA, following him"
"I love thee not, therefore pursue me not."
"Where is Lysander and fair Hermia?"
"The one I'll slay, the other slayeth me."
"Thou told'st me they were stolen unto this wood,"
"And here am I, and wode within this wood,"
"Because I cannot meet my Hermia."
"Hence, get thee gone, and follow me no more."
"You draw me, you hard-hearted adamant,"
"But yet you draw not iron, for my heart"
"Is true as steel: leave you your power to draw,"
"And I shall have no power to follow you."
"Do I entice you? do I speak you fair?"
"Or, rather, do I not in plainest truth"
"Tell you, I do not, nor I cannot love you?"
"And even for that do I love you the more."
"I am your spaniel, and, Demetrius,"
"The more you beat me, I will fawn on you:"
"Use me but as your spaniel, spurn me, strike me,"
"Neglect me, lose me, only give me leave,"
"Unworthy as I am, to follow you."
"What worser place can I beg in your love,--"
"And yet a place of high respect with me,--"
"Than to be used as you use your dog?"
"Tempt not too much the hatred of my spirit,"
"For I am sick when I do look on thee."
"And I am sick when I look not on you."
"You do impeach your modesty too much,"
"To leave the city and commit yourself"
"Into the hands of one that loves you not,"
"To trust the opportunity of night"
"And the ill counsel of a desert place"
"With the rich worth of your virginity."
"Your virtue is my privilege: for that"
"It is not night when I do see your face,"
"Therefore I think I am not in the night,"
"Nor doth this wood lack worlds of company,"
"For you in my respect are all the world:"
"Then how can it be said I am alone,"
"When all the world is here to look on me?"
"I'll run from thee and hide me in the brakes,"
"And leave thee to the mercy of wild beasts."
"The wildest hath not such a heart as you."
"Run when you will, the story shall be changed:"
"Apollo flies, and Daphne holds the chase,"
"The dove pursues the griffin, the mild hind"
"Makes speed to catch the tiger, bootless speed,"
"When cowardice pursues and valour flies."
"I will not stay thy questions, let me go:"
"Or, if thou follow me, do not believe"
"But I shall do thee mischief in the wood."
"Ay, in the temple, in the town, the field,"
"You do me mischief. Fie, Demetrius!"
"Your wrongs do set a scandal on my sex:"
"We cannot fight for love, as men may do,"
"We should be wood and were not made to woo."
"Exit DEMETRIUS"
"I'll follow thee and make a heaven of hell,"
"To die upon the hand I love so well."
Exit
"Fare thee well, nymph: ere he do leave this grove,"
"Thou shalt fly him and he shall seek thy love."
"Re-enter PUCK"
"Hast thou the flower there? Welcome, wanderer."
"Ay, there it is."
"I pray thee, give it me."
"I know a bank where the wild thyme blows,"
"Where oxlips and the nodding violet grows,"
"Quite over-canopied with luscious woodbine,"
"With sweet musk-roses and with eglantine:"
"There sleeps Titania sometime of the night,"
"Lull'd in these flowers with dances and delight,"
"And there the snake throws her enamell'd skin,"
"Weed wide enough to wrap a fairy in:"
"And with the juice of this I'll streak her eyes,"
"And make her full of hateful fantasies."
"Take thou some of it, and seek through this grove:"
"A sweet Athenian lady is in love"
"With a disdainful youth: anoint his eyes,"
"But do it when the next thing he espies"
"May be the lady: thou shalt know the man"
"By the Athenian garments he hath on."
"Effect it with some care, that he may prove"
"More fond on her than she upon her love:"
"And look thou meet me ere the first cock crow."
"Fear not, my lord, your servant shall do so."
Exeunt
"SCENE II. Another part of the wood."
"Enter TITANIA, with her train"
"Come, now a roundel and a fairy song,"
"Then, for the third part of a minute, hence,"
"Some to kill cankers in the musk-rose buds,"
"Some war with rere-mice for their leathern wings,"
"To make my small elves coats, and some keep back"
"The clamorous owl that nightly hoots and wonders"
"At our quaint spirits. Sing me now asleep,"
"Then to your offices and let me rest."
"The Fairies sing"
"You spotted snakes with double tongue,"
"Thorny hedgehogs, be not seen,"
"Newts and blind-worms, do no wrong,"
"Come not near our fairy queen."
"Philomel, with melody"
"Sing in our sweet lullaby,"
"Lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla, lulla, lullaby:"
"Never harm,"
"Nor spell nor charm,"
"Come our lovely lady nigh,"
"So, good night, with lullaby."
"Weaving spiders, come not here,"
"Hence, you long-legg'd spinners, hence!"
"Beetles black, approach not near,"
"Worm nor snail, do no offence."
"Philomel, with melody,  and c."
"Hence, away! now all is well:"
"One aloof stand sentinel."
"Exeunt Fairies. TITANIA sleeps"
"Enter OBERON and squeezes the flower on TITANIA's eyelids"
"What thou seest when thou dost wake,"
"Do it for thy true-love take,"
"Love and languish for his sake:"
"Be it ounce, or cat, or bear,"
"Pard, or boar with bristled hair,"
"In thy eye that shall appear"
"When thou wakest, it is thy dear:"
"Wake when some vile thing is near."
Exit
"Enter LYSANDER and HERMIA"
"Fair love, you faint with wandering in the wood,"
"And to speak troth, I have forgot our way:"
"We'll rest us, Hermia, if you think it good,"
"And tarry for the comfort of the day."
"Be it so, Lysander: find you out a bed,"
"For I upon this bank will rest my head."
"One turf shall serve as pillow for us both,"
"One heart, one bed, two bosoms and one troth."
"Nay, good Lysander, for my sake, my dear,"
"Lie further off yet, do not lie so near."
"O, take the sense, sweet, of my innocence!"
"Love takes the meaning in love's conference."
"I mean, that my heart unto yours is knit"
"So that but one heart we can make of it,"
"Two bosoms interchained with an oath,"
"So then two bosoms and a single troth."
"Then by your side no bed-room me deny,"
"For lying so, Hermia, I do not lie."
"Lysander riddles very prettily:"
"Now much beshrew my manners and my pride,"
"If Hermia meant to say Lysander lied."
"But, gentle friend, for love and courtesy"
"Lie further off, in human modesty,"
"Such separation as may well be said"
"Becomes a virtuous bachelor and a maid,"
"So far be distant, and, good night, sweet friend:"
"Thy love ne'er alter till thy sweet life end!"
"Amen, amen, to that fair prayer, say I,"
"And then end life when I end loyalty!"
"Here is my bed: sleep give thee all his rest!"
"With half that wish the wisher's eyes be press'd!"
"They sleep"
"Enter PUCK"
"Through the forest have I gone."
"But Athenian found I none,"
"On whose eyes I might approve"
"This flower's force in stirring love."
"Night and silence.--Who is here?"
"Weeds of Athens he doth wear:"
"This is he, my master said,"
"Despised the Athenian maid,"
"And here the maiden, sleeping sound,"
"On the dank and dirty ground."
"Pretty soul! she durst not lie"
"Near this lack-love, this kill-courtesy."
"Churl, upon thy eyes I throw"
"All the power this charm doth owe."
"When thou wakest, let love forbid"
"Sleep his seat on thy eyelid:"
"So awake when I am gone,"
"For I must now to Oberon."
Exit
"Enter DEMETRIUS and HELENA, running"
"Stay, though thou kill me, sweet Demetrius."
"I charge thee, hence, and do not haunt me thus."
"O, wilt thou darkling leave me? do not so."
"Stay, on thy peril: I alone will go."
Exit
"O, I am out of breath in this fond chase!"
"The more my prayer, the lesser is my grace."
"Happy is Hermia, wheresoe'er she lies,"
"For she hath blessed and attractive eyes."
"How came her eyes so bright? Not with salt tears:"
"If so, my eyes are oftener wash'd than hers."
"No, no, I am as ugly as a bear,"
"For beasts that meet me run away for fear:"
"Therefore no marvel though Demetrius"
"Do, as a monster fly my presence thus."
"What wicked and dissembling glass of mine"
"Made me compare with Hermia's sphery eyne?"
"But who is here? Lysander! on the ground!"
"Dead? or asleep? I see no blood, no wound."
"Lysander if you live, good sir, awake."
"[Awaking]  And run through fire I will for thy sweet sake."
"Transparent Helena! Nature shows art,"
"That through thy bosom makes me see thy heart."
"Where is Demetrius? O, how fit a word"
"Is that vile name to perish on my sword!"
"Do not say so, Lysander, say not so"
"What though he love your Hermia? Lord, what though?"
"Yet Hermia still loves you: then be content."
"Content with Hermia! No, I do repent"
"The tedious minutes I with her have spent."
"Not Hermia but Helena I love:"
"Who will not change a raven for a dove?"
"The will of man is by his reason sway'd,"
"And reason says you are the worthier maid."
"Things growing are not ripe until their season"
"So I, being young, till now ripe not to reason,"
"And touching now the point of human skill,"
"Reason becomes the marshal to my will"
"And leads me to your eyes, where I o'erlook"
"Love's stories written in love's richest book."
"Wherefore was I to this keen mockery born?"
"When at your hands did I deserve this scorn?"
"Is't not enough, is't not enough, young man,"
"That I did never, no, nor never can,"
"Deserve a sweet look from Demetrius' eye,"
"But you must flout my insufficiency?"
"Good troth, you do me wrong, good sooth, you do,"
"In such disdainful manner me to woo."
"But fare you well: perforce I must confess"
"I thought you lord of more true gentleness."
"O, that a lady, of one man refused."
"Should of another therefore be abused!"
Exit
"She sees not Hermia. Hermia, sleep thou there:"
"And never mayst thou come Lysander near!"
"For as a surfeit of the sweetest things"
"The deepest loathing to the stomach brings,"
"Or as tie heresies that men do leave"
"Are hated most of those they did deceive,"
"So thou, my surfeit and my heresy,"
"Of all be hated, but the most of me!"
"And, all my powers, address your love and might"
"To honour Helen and to be her knight!"
Exit
"[Awaking]  Help me, Lysander, help me! do thy best"
"To pluck this crawling serpent from my breast!"
"Ay me, for pity! what a dream was here!"
"Lysander, look how I do quake with fear:"
"Methought a serpent eat my heart away,"
"And you sat smiling at his cruel pray."
"Lysander! what, removed? Lysander! lord!"
"What, out of hearing? gone? no sound, no word?"
"Alack, where are you speak, an if you hear,"
"Speak, of all loves! I swoon almost with fear."
"No? then I well perceive you all not nigh"
"Either death or you I'll find immediately."
Exit
"ACT III"
"SCENE I. The wood. TITANIA lying asleep."
"Enter QUINCE, SNUG, BOTTOM, FLUTE, SNOUT, and STARVELING"
"Are we all met?"
"Pat, pat, and here's a marvellous convenient place"
"for our rehearsal. This green plot shall be our"
"stage, this hawthorn-brake our tiring-house, and we"
"will do it in action as we will do it before the duke."
"Peter Quince,--"
"What sayest thou, bully Bottom?"
"There are things in this comedy of Pyramus and"
"Thisby that will never please. First, Pyramus must"
"draw a sword to kill himself, which the ladies"
"cannot abide. How answer you that?"
"By'r lakin, a parlous fear."
"I believe we must leave the killing out, when all is done."
"Not a whit: I have a device to make all well."
"Write me a prologue, and let the prologue seem to"
"say, we will do no harm with our swords, and that"
"Pyramus is not killed indeed, and, for the more"
"better assurance, tell them that I, Pyramus, am not"
"Pyramus, but Bottom the weaver: this will put them"
"out of fear."
"Well, we will have such a prologue, and it shall be"
"written in eight and six."
"No, make it two more, let it be written in eight and eight."
"Will not the ladies be afeard of the lion?"
"I fear it, I promise you."
"Masters, you ought to consider with yourselves: to"
"bring in--God shield us!--a lion among ladies, is a"
"most dreadful thing, for there is not a more fearful"
"wild-fowl than your lion living, and we ought to"
"look to 't."
"Therefore another prologue must tell he is not a lion."
"Nay, you must name his name, and half his face must"
"be seen through the lion's neck: and he himself"
"must speak through, saying thus, or to the same"
"defect,--'Ladies,'--or 'Fair-ladies--I would wish"
"You,'--or 'I would request you,'--or 'I would"
"entreat you,--not to fear, not to tremble: my life"
"for yours. If you think I come hither as a lion, it"
"were pity of my life: no I am no such thing, I am a"
"man as other men are,' and there indeed let him name"
"his name, and tell them plainly he is Snug the joiner."
"Well it shall be so. But there is two hard things,"
"that is, to bring the moonlight into a chamber, for,"
"you know, Pyramus and Thisby meet by moonlight."
"Doth the moon shine that night we play our play?"
"A calendar, a calendar! look in the almanac, find"
"out moonshine, find out moonshine."
"Yes, it doth shine that night."
"Why, then may you leave a casement of the great"
"chamber window, where we play, open, and the moon"
"may shine in at the casement."
"Ay, or else one must come in with a bush of thorns"
"and a lanthorn, and say he comes to disfigure, or to"
"present, the person of Moonshine. Then, there is"
"another thing: we must have a wall in the great"
"chamber, for Pyramus and Thisby says the story, did"
"talk through the chink of a wall."
"You can never bring in a wall. What say you, Bottom?"
"Some man or other must present Wall: and let him"
"have some plaster, or some loam, or some rough-cast"
"about him, to signify wall, and let him hold his"
"fingers thus, and through that cranny shall Pyramus"
"and Thisby whisper."
"If that may be, then all is well. Come, sit  down,"
"every mother's son, and rehearse your parts."
"Pyramus, you begin: when you have spoken your"
"speech, enter into that brake: and so every one"
"according to his cue."
"Enter PUCK behind"
"What hempen home-spuns have we swaggering here,"
"So near the cradle of the fairy queen?"
"What, a play toward! I'll be an auditor,"
"An actor too, perhaps, if I see cause."
"Speak, Pyramus. Thisby, stand forth."
"Thisby, the flowers of odious savours sweet,--"
"Odours, odours."
"--odours savours sweet:"
"So hath thy breath, my dearest Thisby dear."
"But hark, a voice! stay thou but here awhile,"
"And by and by I will to thee appear."
Exit
"A stranger Pyramus than e'er played here."
Exit
"Must I speak now?"
"Ay, marry, must you, for you must understand he goes"
"but to see a noise that he heard, and is to come again."
"Most radiant Pyramus, most lily-white of hue,"
"Of colour like the red rose on triumphant brier,"
"Most brisky juvenal and eke most lovely Jew,"
"As true as truest horse that yet would never tire,"
"I'll meet thee, Pyramus, at Ninny's tomb."
"'Ninus' tomb,' man: why, you must not speak that"
"yet, that you answer to Pyramus: you speak all your"
"part at once, cues and all Pyramus enter: your cue"
"is past, it is, 'never tire.'"
"O,--As true as truest horse, that yet would"
"never tire."
"Re-enter PUCK, and BOTTOM with an ass's head"
"If I were fair, Thisby, I were only thine."
"O monstrous! O strange! we are haunted. Pray,"
"masters! fly, masters! Help!"
"Exeunt QUINCE, SNUG, FLUTE, SNOUT, and STARVELING"
"I'll follow you, I'll lead you about a round,"
"Through bog, through bush, through brake, through brier:"
"Sometime a horse I'll be, sometime a hound,"
"A hog, a headless bear, sometime a fire,"
"And neigh, and bark, and grunt, and roar, and burn,"
"Like horse, hound, hog, bear, fire, at every turn."
Exit
"Why do they run away? this is a knavery of them to"
"make me afeard."
"Re-enter SNOUT"
"O Bottom, thou art changed! what do I see on thee?"
"What do you see? you see an asshead of your own, do"
you?
"Exit SNOUT"
"Re-enter QUINCE"
"Bless thee, Bottom! bless thee! thou art"
translated.
Exit
"I see their knavery: this is to make an ass of me,"
"to fright me, if they could. But I will not stir"
"from this place, do what they can: I will walk up"
"and down here, and I will sing, that they shall hear"
"I am not afraid."
Sings
"The ousel cock so black of hue,"
"With orange-tawny bill,"
"The throstle with his note so true,"
"The wren with little quill,--"
"[Awaking]  What angel wakes me from my flowery bed?"
[Sings]
"The finch, the sparrow and the lark,"
"The plain-song cuckoo gray,"
"Whose note full many a man doth mark,"
"And dares not answer nay,--"
"for, indeed, who would set his wit to so foolish"
"a bird? who would give a bird the lie, though he cry"
"'cuckoo' never so?"
"I pray thee, gentle mortal, sing again:"
"Mine ear is much enamour'd of thy note,"
"So is mine eye enthralled to thy shape,"
"And thy fair virtue's force perforce doth move me"
"On the first view to say, to swear, I love thee."
"Methinks, mistress, you should have little reason"
"for that: and yet, to say the truth, reason and"
"love keep little company together now-a-days, the"
"more the pity that some honest neighbours will not"
"make them friends. Nay, I can gleek upon occasion."
"Thou art as wise as thou art beautiful."
"Not so, neither: but if I had wit enough to get out"
"of this wood, I have enough to serve mine own turn."
"Out of this wood do not desire to go:"
"Thou shalt remain here, whether thou wilt or no."
"I am a spirit of no common rate,"
"The summer still doth tend upon my state,"
"And I do love thee: therefore, go with me,"
"I'll give thee fairies to attend on thee,"
"And they shall fetch thee jewels from the deep,"
"And sing while thou on pressed flowers dost sleep,"
"And I will purge thy mortal grossness so"
"That thou shalt like an airy spirit go."
"Peaseblossom! Cobweb! Moth! and Mustardseed!"
"Enter PEASEBLOSSOM, COBWEB, MOTH, and MUSTARDSEED"
Ready.
"And I."
"And I."
"And I."
"Where shall we go?"
"Be kind and courteous to this gentleman,"
"Hop in his walks and gambol in his eyes,"
"Feed him with apricocks and dewberries,"
"With purple grapes, green figs, and mulberries,"
"The honey-bags steal from the humble-bees,"
"And for night-tapers crop their waxen thighs"
"And light them at the fiery glow-worm's eyes,"
"To have my love to bed and to arise,"
"And pluck the wings from Painted butterflies"
"To fan the moonbeams from his sleeping eyes:"
"Nod to him, elves, and do him courtesies."
"Hail, mortal!"
Hail!
Hail!
Hail!
"I cry your worship's mercy, heartily: I beseech your"
"worship's name."
Cobweb.
"I shall desire you of more acquaintance, good Master"
"Cobweb: if I cut my finger, I shall make bold with"
"you. Your name, honest gentleman?"
Peaseblossom.
"I pray you, commend me to Mistress Squash, your"
"mother, and to Master Peascod, your father. Good"
"Master Peaseblossom, I shall desire you of more"
"acquaintance too. Your name, I beseech you, sir?"
Mustardseed.
"Good Master Mustardseed, I know your patience well:"
"that same cowardly, giant-like ox-beef hath"
"devoured many a gentleman of your house: I promise"
"you your kindred had made my eyes water ere now. I"
"desire your more acquaintance, good Master"
Mustardseed.
"Come, wait upon him, lead him to my bower."
"The moon methinks looks with a watery eye,"
"And when she weeps, weeps every little flower,"
"Lamenting some enforced chastity."
"Tie up my love's tongue bring him silently."
Exeunt
"SCENE II. Another part of the wood."
"Enter OBERON"
"I wonder if Titania be awaked,"
"Then, what it was that next came in her eye,"
"Which she must dote on in extremity."
"Enter PUCK"
"Here comes my messenger."
"How now, mad spirit!"
"What night-rule now about this haunted grove?"
"My mistress with a monster is in love."
"Near to her close and consecrated bower,"
"While she was in her dull and sleeping hour,"
"A crew of patches, rude mechanicals,"
"That work for bread upon Athenian stalls,"
"Were met together to rehearse a play"
"Intended for great Theseus' nuptial-day."
"The shallowest thick-skin of that barren sort,"
"Who Pyramus presented, in their sport"
"Forsook his scene and enter'd in a brake"
"When I did him at this advantage take,"
"An ass's nole I fixed on his head:"
"Anon his Thisbe must be answered,"
"And forth my mimic comes. When they him spy,"
"As wild geese that the creeping fowler eye,"
"Or russet-pated choughs, many in sort,"
"Rising and cawing at the gun's report,"
"Sever themselves and madly sweep the sky,"
"So, at his sight, away his fellows fly,"
"And, at our stamp, here o'er and o'er one falls,"
"He murder cries and help from Athens calls."
"Their sense thus weak, lost with their fears"
"thus strong,"
"Made senseless things begin to do them wrong,"
"For briers and thorns at their apparel snatch,"
"Some sleeves, some hats, from yielders all"
"things catch."
"I led them on in this distracted fear,"
"And left sweet Pyramus translated there:"
"When in that moment, so it came to pass,"
"Titania waked and straightway loved an ass."
"This falls out better than I could devise."
"But hast thou yet latch'd the Athenian's eyes"
"With the love-juice, as I did bid thee do?"
"I took him sleeping,--that is finish'd too,--"
"And the Athenian woman by his side:"
"That, when he waked, of force she must be eyed."
"Enter HERMIA and DEMETRIUS"
"Stand close: this is the same Athenian."
"This is the woman, but not this the man."
"O, why rebuke you him that loves you so?"
"Lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe."
"Now I but chide, but I should use thee worse,"
"For thou, I fear, hast given me cause to curse,"
"If thou hast slain Lysander in his sleep,"
"Being o'er shoes in blood, plunge in the deep,"
"And kill me too."
"The sun was not so true unto the day"
"As he to me: would he have stolen away"
"From sleeping Hermia? I'll believe as soon"
"This whole earth may be bored and that the moon"
"May through the centre creep and so displease"
"Her brother's noontide with Antipodes."
"It cannot be but thou hast murder'd him,"
"So should a murderer look, so dead, so grim."
"So should the murder'd look, and so should I,"
"Pierced through the heart with your stern cruelty:"
"Yet you, the murderer, look as bright, as clear,"
"As yonder Venus in her glimmering sphere."
"What's this to my Lysander? where is he?"
"Ah, good Demetrius, wilt thou give him me?"
"I had rather give his carcass to my hounds."
"Out, dog! out, cur! thou drivest me past the bounds"
"Of maiden's patience. Hast thou slain him, then?"
"Henceforth be never number'd among men!"
"O, once tell true, tell true, even for my sake!"
"Durst thou have look'd upon him being awake,"
"And hast thou kill'd him sleeping? O brave touch!"
"Could not a worm, an adder, do so much?"
"An adder did it, for with doubler tongue"
"Than thine, thou serpent, never adder stung."
"You spend your passion on a misprised mood:"
"I am not guilty of Lysander's blood,"
"Nor is he dead, for aught that I can tell."
"I pray thee, tell me then that he is well."
"An if I could, what should I get therefore?"
"A privilege never to see me more."
"And from thy hated presence part I so:"
"See me no more, whether he be dead or no."
Exit
"There is no following her in this fierce vein:"
"Here therefore for a while I will remain."
"So sorrow's heaviness doth heavier grow"
"For debt that bankrupt sleep doth sorrow owe:"
"Which now in some slight measure it will pay,"
"If for his tender here I make some stay."
"Lies down and sleeps"
"What hast thou done? thou hast mistaken quite"
"And laid the love-juice on some true-love's sight:"
"Of thy misprision must perforce ensue"
"Some true love turn'd and not a false turn'd true."
"Then fate o'er-rules, that, one man holding troth,"
"A million fail, confounding oath on oath."
"About the wood go swifter than the wind,"
"And Helena of Athens look thou find:"
"All fancy-sick she is and pale of cheer,"
"With sighs of love, that costs the fresh blood dear:"
"By some illusion see thou bring her here:"
"I'll charm his eyes against she do appear."
"I go, I go, look how I go,"
"Swifter than arrow from the Tartar's bow."
Exit
"Flower of this purple dye,"
"Hit with Cupid's archery,"
"Sink in apple of his eye."
"When his love he doth espy,"
"Let her shine as gloriously"
"As the Venus of the sky."
"When thou wakest, if she be by,"
"Beg of her for remedy."
"Re-enter PUCK"
"Captain of our fairy band,"
"Helena is here at hand,"
"And the youth, mistook by me,"
"Pleading for a lover's fee."
"Shall we their fond pageant see?"
"Lord, what fools these mortals be!"
"Stand aside: the noise they make"
"Will cause Demetrius to awake."
"Then will two at once woo one,"
"That must needs be sport alone,"
"And those things do best please me"
"That befal preposterously."
"Enter LYSANDER and HELENA"
"Why should you think that I should woo in scorn?"
"Scorn and derision never come in tears:"
"Look, when I vow, I weep, and vows so born,"
"In their nativity all truth appears."
"How can these things in me seem scorn to you,"
"Bearing the badge of faith, to prove them true?"
"You do advance your cunning more and more."
"When truth kills truth, O devilish-holy fray!"
"These vows are Hermia's: will you give her o'er?"
"Weigh oath with oath, and you will nothing weigh:"
"Your vows to her and me, put in two scales,"
"Will even weigh, and both as light as tales."
"I had no judgment when to her I swore."
"Nor none, in my mind, now you give her o'er."
"Demetrius loves her, and he loves not you."
"[Awaking]  O Helena, goddess, nymph, perfect, divine!"
"To what, my love, shall I compare thine eyne?"
"Crystal is muddy. O, how ripe in show"
"Thy lips, those kissing cherries, tempting grow!"
"That pure congealed white, high Taurus snow,"
"Fann'd with the eastern wind, turns to a crow"
"When thou hold'st up thy hand: O, let me kiss"
"This princess of pure white, this seal of bliss!"
"O spite! O hell! I see you all are bent"
"To set against me for your merriment:"
"If you we re civil and knew courtesy,"
"You would not do me thus much injury."
"Can you not hate me, as I know you do,"
"But you must join in souls to mock me too?"
"If you were men, as men you are in show,"
"You would not use a gentle lady so,"
"To vow, and swear, and superpraise my parts,"
"When I am sure you hate me with your hearts."
"You both are rivals, and love Hermia,"
"And now both rivals, to mock Helena:"
"A trim exploit, a manly enterprise,"
"To conjure tears up in a poor maid's eyes"
"With your derision! none of noble sort"
"Would so offend a virgin, and extort"
"A poor soul's patience, all to make you sport."
"You are unkind, Demetrius, be not so,"
"For you love Hermia, this you know I know:"
"And here, with all good will, with all my heart,"
"In Hermia's love I yield you up my part,"
"And yours of Helena to me bequeath,"
"Whom I do love and will do till my death."
"Never did mockers waste more idle breath."
"Lysander, keep thy Hermia, I will none:"
"If e'er I loved her, all that love is gone."
"My heart to her but as guest-wise sojourn'd,"
"And now to Helen is it home return'd,"
"There to remain."
"Helen, it is not so."
"Disparage not the faith thou dost not know,"
"Lest, to thy peril, thou aby it dear."
"Look, where thy love comes, yonder is thy dear."
"Re-enter HERMIA"
"Dark night, that from the eye his function takes,"
"The ear more quick of apprehension makes,"
"Wherein it doth impair the seeing sense,"
"It pays the hearing double recompense."
"Thou art not by mine eye, Lysander, found,"
"Mine ear, I thank it, brought me to thy sound"
"But why unkindly didst thou leave me so?"
"Why should he stay, whom love doth press to go?"
"What love could press Lysander from my side?"
"Lysander's love, that would not let him bide,"
"Fair Helena, who more engilds the night"
"Than all you fiery oes and eyes of light."
"Why seek'st thou me? could not this make thee know,"
"The hate I bear thee made me leave thee so?"
"You speak not as you think: it cannot be."
"Lo, she is one of this confederacy!"
"Now I perceive they have conjoin'd all three"
"To fashion this false sport, in spite of me."
"Injurious Hermia! most ungrateful maid!"
"Have you conspired, have you with these contrived"
"To bait me with this foul derision?"
"Is all the counsel that we two have shared,"
"The sisters' vows, the hours that we have spent,"
"When we have chid the hasty-footed time"
"For parting us,--O, is it all forgot?"
"All school-days' friendship, childhood innocence?"
"We, Hermia, like two artificial gods,"
"Have with our needles created both one flower,"
"Both on one sampler, sitting on one cushion,"
"Both warbling of one song, both in one key,"
"As if our hands, our sides, voices and minds,"
"Had been incorporate. So we grow together,"
"Like to a double cherry, seeming parted,"
"But yet an union in partition,"
"Two lovely berries moulded on one stem,"
"So, with two seeming bodies, but one heart,"
"Two of the first, like coats in heraldry,"
"Due but to one and crowned with one crest."
"And will you rent our ancient love asunder,"
"To join with men in scorning your poor friend?"
"It is not friendly, 'tis not maidenly:"
"Our sex, as well as I, may chide you for it,"
"Though I alone do feel the injury."
"I am amazed at your passionate words."
"I scorn you not: it seems that you scorn me."
"Have you not set Lysander, as in scorn,"
"To follow me and praise my eyes and face?"
"And made your other love, Demetrius,"
"Who even but now did spurn me with his foot,"
"To call me goddess, nymph, divine and rare,"
"Precious, celestial? Wherefore speaks he this"
"To her he hates? and wherefore doth Lysander"
"Deny your love, so rich within his soul,"
"And tender me, forsooth, affection,"
"But by your setting on, by your consent?"
"What thought I be not so in grace as you,"
"So hung upon with love, so fortunate,"
"But miserable most, to love unloved?"
"This you should pity rather than despise."
"I understand not what you mean by this."
"Ay, do, persever, counterfeit sad looks,"
"Make mouths upon me when I turn my back,"
"Wink each at other, hold the sweet jest up:"
"This sport, well carried, shall be chronicled."
"If you have any pity, grace, or manners,"
"You would not make me such an argument."
"But fare ye well: 'tis partly my own fault,"
"Which death or absence soon shall remedy."
"Stay, gentle Helena, hear my excuse:"
"My love, my life my soul, fair Helena!"
"O excellent!"
"Sweet, do not scorn her so."
"If she cannot entreat, I can compel."
"Thou canst compel no more than she entreat:"
"Thy threats have no more strength than her weak prayers."
"Helen, I love thee, by my life, I do:"
"I swear by that which I will lose for thee,"
"To prove him false that says I love thee not."
"I say I love thee more than he can do."
"If thou say so, withdraw, and prove it too."
"Quick, come!"
"Lysander, whereto tends all this?"
"Away, you Ethiope!"
"No, no, he'll [        ]"
"Seem to break loose, take on as you would follow,"
"But yet come not: you are a tame man, go!"
"Hang off, thou cat, thou burr! vile thing, let loose,"
"Or I will shake thee from me like a serpent!"
"Why are you grown so rude? what change is this?"
"Sweet love,--"
"Thy love! out, tawny Tartar, out!"
"Out, loathed medicine! hated potion, hence!"
"Do you not jest?"
"Yes, sooth, and so do you."
"Demetrius, I will keep my word with thee."
"I would I had your bond, for I perceive"
"A weak bond holds you: I'll not trust your word."
"What, should I hurt her, strike her, kill her dead?"
"Although I hate her, I'll not harm her so."
"What, can you do me greater harm than hate?"
"Hate me! wherefore? O me! what news, my love!"
"Am not I Hermia? are not you Lysander?"
"I am as fair now as I was erewhile."
"Since night you loved me, yet since night you left"
me:
"Why, then you left me--O, the gods forbid!--"
"In earnest, shall I say?"
"Ay, by my life,"
"And never did desire to see thee more."
"Therefore be out of hope, of question, of doubt,"
"Be certain, nothing truer, 'tis no jest"
"That I do hate thee and love Helena."
"O me! you juggler! you canker-blossom!"
"You thief of love! what, have you come by night"
"And stolen my love's heart from him?"
"Fine, i'faith!"
"Have you no modesty, no maiden shame,"
"No touch of bashfulness? What, will you tear"
"Impatient answers from my gentle tongue?"
"Fie, fie! you counterfeit, you puppet, you!"
"Puppet? why so? ay, that way goes the game."
"Now I perceive that she hath made compare"
"Between our statures, she hath urged her height,"
"And with her personage, her tall personage,"
"Her height, forsooth, she hath prevail'd with him."
"And are you grown so high in his esteem,"
"Because I am so dwarfish and so low?"
"How low am I, thou painted maypole? speak,"
"How low am I? I am not yet so low"
"But that my nails can reach unto thine eyes."
"I pray you, though you mock me, gentlemen,"
"Let her not hurt me: I was never curst,"
"I have no gift at all in shrewishness,"
"I am a right maid for my cowardice:"
"Let her not strike me. You perhaps may think,"
"Because she is something lower than myself,"
"That I can match her."
"Lower! hark, again."
"Good Hermia, do not be so bitter with me."
"I evermore did love you, Hermia,"
"Did ever keep your counsels, never wrong'd you,"
"Save that, in love unto Demetrius,"
"I told him of your stealth unto this wood."
"He follow'd you, for love I follow'd him,"
"But he hath chid me hence and threaten'd me"
"To strike me, spurn me, nay, to kill me too:"
"And now, so you will let me quiet go,"
"To Athens will I bear my folly back"
"And follow you no further: let me go:"
"You see how simple and how fond I am."
"Why, get you gone: who is't that hinders you?"
"A foolish heart, that I leave here behind."
"What, with Lysander?"
"With Demetrius."
"Be not afraid, she shall not harm thee, Helena."
"No, sir, she shall not, though you take her part."
"O, when she's angry, she is keen and shrewd!"
"She was a vixen when she went to school,"
"And though she be but little, she is fierce."
"'Little' again! nothing but 'low' and 'little'!"
"Why will you suffer her to flout me thus?"
"Let me come to her."
"Get you gone, you dwarf,"
"You minimus, of hindering knot-grass made,"
"You bead, you acorn."
"You are too officious"
"In her behalf that scorns your services."
"Let her alone: speak not of Helena,"
"Take not her part, for, if thou dost intend"
"Never so little show of love to her,"
"Thou shalt aby it."
"Now she holds me not,"
"Now follow, if thou darest, to try whose right,"
"Of thine or mine, is most in Helena."
"Follow! nay, I'll go with thee, cheek by jole."
"Exeunt LYSANDER and DEMETRIUS"
"You, mistress, all this coil is 'long of you:"
"Nay, go not back."
"I will not trust you, I,"
"Nor longer stay in your curst company."
"Your hands than mine are quicker for a fray,"
"My legs are longer though, to run away."
Exit
"I am amazed, and know not what to say."
Exit
"This is thy negligence: still thou mistakest,"
"Or else committ'st thy knaveries wilfully."
"Believe me, king of shadows, I mistook."
"Did not you tell me I should know the man"
"By the Athenian garment be had on?"
"And so far blameless proves my enterprise,"
"That I have 'nointed an Athenian's eyes,"
"And so far am I glad it so did sort"
"As this their jangling I esteem a sport."
"Thou see'st these lovers seek a place to fight:"
"Hie therefore, Robin, overcast the night,"
"The starry welkin cover thou anon"
"With drooping fog as black as Acheron,"
"And lead these testy rivals so astray"
"As one come not within another's way."
"Like to Lysander sometime frame thy tongue,"
"Then stir Demetrius up with bitter wrong,"
"And sometime rail thou like Demetrius,"
"And from each other look thou lead them thus,"
"Till o'er their brows death-counterfeiting sleep"
"With leaden legs and batty wings doth creep:"
"Then crush this herb into Lysander's eye,"
"Whose liquor hath this virtuous property,"
"To take from thence all error with his might,"
"And make his eyeballs roll with wonted sight."
"When they next wake, all this derision"
"Shall seem a dream and fruitless vision,"
"And back to Athens shall the lovers wend,"
"With league whose date till death shall never end."
"Whiles I in this affair do thee employ,"
"I'll to my queen and beg her Indian boy,"
"And then I will her charmed eye release"
"From monster's view, and all things shall be peace."
"My fairy lord, this must be done with haste,"
"For night's swift dragons cut the clouds full fast,"
"And yonder shines Aurora's harbinger,"
"At whose approach, ghosts, wandering here and there,"
"Troop home to churchyards: damned spirits all,"
"That in crossways and floods have burial,"
"Already to their wormy beds are gone,"
"For fear lest day should look their shames upon,"
"They willfully themselves exile from light"
"And must for aye consort with black-brow'd night."
"But we are spirits of another sort:"
"I with the morning's love have oft made sport,"
"And, like a forester, the groves may tread,"
"Even till the eastern gate, all fiery-red,"
"Opening on Neptune with fair blessed beams,"
"Turns into yellow gold his salt green streams."
"But, notwithstanding, haste, make no delay:"
"We may effect this business yet ere day."
Exit
"Up and down, up and down,"
"I will lead them up and down:"
"I am fear'd in field and town:"
"Goblin, lead them up and down."
"Here comes one."
"Re-enter LYSANDER"
"Where art thou, proud Demetrius? speak thou now."
"Here, villain, drawn and ready. Where art thou?"
"I will be with thee straight."
"Follow me, then,"
"To plainer ground."
"Exit LYSANDER, as following the voice"
"Re-enter DEMETRIUS"
"Lysander! speak again:"
"Thou runaway, thou coward, art thou fled?"
"Speak! In some bush? Where dost thou hide thy head?"
"Thou coward, art thou bragging to the stars,"
"Telling the bushes that thou look'st for wars,"
"And wilt not come? Come, recreant, come, thou child,"
"I'll whip thee with a rod: he is defiled"
"That draws a sword on thee."
"Yea, art thou there?"
"Follow my voice: we'll try no manhood here."
Exeunt
"Re-enter LYSANDER"
"He goes before me and still dares me on:"
"When I come where he calls, then he is gone."
"The villain is much lighter-heel'd than I:"
"I follow'd fast, but faster he did fly,"
"That fallen am I in dark uneven way,"
"And here will rest me."
"Lies down"
"Come, thou gentle day!"
"For if but once thou show me thy grey light,"
"I'll find Demetrius and revenge this spite."
Sleeps
"Re-enter PUCK and DEMETRIUS"
"Ho, ho, ho! Coward, why comest thou not?"
"Abide me, if thou darest, for well I wot"
"Thou runn'st before me, shifting every place,"
"And darest not stand, nor look me in the face."
"Where art thou now?"
"Come hither: I am here."
"Nay, then, thou mock'st me. Thou shalt buy this dear,"
"If ever I thy face by daylight see:"
"Now, go thy way. Faintness constraineth me"
"To measure out my length on this cold bed."
"By day's approach look to be visited."
"Lies down and sleeps"
"Re-enter HELENA"
"O weary night, O long and tedious night,"
"Abate thy hour! Shine comforts from the east,"
"That I may back to Athens by daylight,"
"From these that my poor company detest:"
"And sleep, that sometimes shuts up sorrow's eye,"
"Steal me awhile from mine own company."
"Lies down and sleeps"
"Yet but three? Come one more,"
"Two of both kinds make up four."
"Here she comes, curst and sad:"
"Cupid is a knavish lad,"
"Thus to make poor females mad."
"Re-enter HERMIA"
"Never so weary, never so in woe,"
"Bedabbled with the dew and torn with briers,"
"I can no further crawl, no further go,"
"My legs can keep no pace with my desires."
"Here will I rest me till the break of day."
"Heavens shield Lysander, if they mean a fray!"
"Lies down and sleeps"
"On the ground"
"Sleep sound:"
"I'll apply"
"To your eye,"
"Gentle lover, remedy."
"Squeezing the juice on LYSANDER's eyes"
"When thou wakest,"
"Thou takest"
"True delight"
"In the sight"
"Of thy former lady's eye:"
"And the country proverb known,"
"That every man should take his own,"
"In your waking shall be shown:"
"Jack shall have Jill,"
"Nought shall go ill,"
"The man shall have his mare again, and all shall be well."
Exit
"ACT IV"
"SCENE I. The same. LYSANDER, DEMETRIUS, HELENA, and HERMIA"
"lying asleep."
"Enter TITANIA and BOTTOM, PEASEBLOSSOM, COBWEB, MOTH,  MUSTARDSEED, and other Fairies attending, OBERON behind unseen"
"Come, sit thee down upon this flowery bed,"
"While I thy amiable cheeks do coy,"
"And stick musk-roses in thy sleek smooth head,"
"And kiss thy fair large ears, my gentle joy."
"Where's Peaseblossom?"
Ready.
"Scratch my head Peaseblossom. Where's Mounsieur Cobweb?"
Ready.
"Mounsieur Cobweb, good mounsieur, get you your"
"weapons in your hand, and kill me a red-hipped"
"humble-bee on the top of a thistle, and, good"
"mounsieur, bring me the honey-bag. Do not fret"
"yourself too much in the action, mounsieur, and,"
"good mounsieur, have a care the honey-bag break not,"
"I would be loath to have you overflown with a"
"honey-bag, signior. Where's Mounsieur Mustardseed?"
Ready.
"Give me your neaf, Mounsieur Mustardseed. Pray you,"
"leave your courtesy, good mounsieur."
"What's your Will?"
"Nothing, good mounsieur, but to help Cavalery Cobweb"
"to scratch. I must to the barber's, monsieur, for"
"methinks I am marvellous hairy about the face, and I"
"am such a tender ass, if my hair do but tickle me,"
"I must scratch."
"What, wilt thou hear some music,"
"my sweet love?"
"I have a reasonable good ear in music. Let's have"
"the tongs and the bones."
"Or say, sweet love, what thou desirest to eat."
"Truly, a peck of provender: I could munch your good"
"dry oats. Methinks I have a great desire to a bottle"
"of hay: good hay, sweet hay, hath no fellow."
"I have a venturous fairy that shall seek"
"The squirrel's hoard, and fetch thee new nuts."
"I had rather have a handful or two of dried peas."
"But, I pray you, let none of your people stir me: I"
"have an exposition of sleep come upon me."
"Sleep thou, and I will wind thee in my arms."
"Fairies, begone, and be all ways away."
"Exeunt fairies"
"So doth the woodbine the sweet honeysuckle"
"Gently entwist, the female ivy so"
"Enrings the barky fingers of the elm."
"O, how I love thee! how I dote on thee!"
"They sleep"
"Enter PUCK"
"[Advancing]  Welcome, good Robin."
"See'st thou this sweet sight?"
"Her dotage now I do begin to pity:"
"For, meeting her of late behind the wood,"
"Seeking sweet favours from this hateful fool,"
"I did upbraid her and fall out with her,"
"For she his hairy temples then had rounded"
"With a coronet of fresh and fragrant flowers,"
"And that same dew, which sometime on the buds"
"Was wont to swell like round and orient pearls,"
"Stood now within the pretty flowerets' eyes"
"Like tears that did their own disgrace bewail."
"When I had at my pleasure taunted her"
"And she in mild terms begg'd my patience,"
"I then did ask of her her changeling child,"
"Which straight she gave me, and her fairy sent"
"To bear him to my bower in fairy land."
"And now I have the boy, I will undo"
"This hateful imperfection of her eyes:"
"And, gentle Puck, take this transformed scalp"
"From off the head of this Athenian swain,"
"That, he awaking when the other do,"
"May all to Athens back again repair"
"And think no more of this night's accidents"
"But as the fierce vexation of a dream."
"But first I will release the fairy queen."
"Be as thou wast wont to be,"
"See as thou wast wont to see:"
"Dian's bud o'er Cupid's flower"
"Hath such force and blessed power."
"Now, my Titania, wake you, my sweet queen."
"My Oberon! what visions have I seen!"
"Methought I was enamour'd of an ass."
"There lies your love."
"How came these things to pass?"
"O, how mine eyes do loathe his visage now!"
"Silence awhile. Robin, take off this head."
"Titania, music call, and strike more dead"
"Than common sleep of all these five the sense."
"Music, ho! music, such as charmeth sleep!"
"Music, still"
"Now, when thou wakest, with thine"
"own fool's eyes peep."
"Sound, music! Come, my queen, take hands with me,"
"And rock the ground whereon these sleepers be."
"Now thou and I are new in amity,"
"And will to-morrow midnight solemnly"
"Dance in Duke Theseus' house triumphantly,"
"And bless it to all fair prosperity:"
"There shall the pairs of faithful lovers be"
"Wedded, with Theseus, all in jollity."
"Fairy king, attend, and mark:"
"I do hear the morning lark."
"Then, my queen, in silence sad,"
"Trip we after the night's shade:"
"We the globe can compass soon,"
"Swifter than the wandering moon."
"Come, my lord, and in our flight"
"Tell me how it came this night"
"That I sleeping here was found"
"With these mortals on the ground."
Exeunt
"Horns winded within"
"Enter THESEUS, HIPPOLYTA, EGEUS, and train"
"Go, one of you, find out the forester,"
"For now our observation is perform'd,"
"And since we have the vaward of the day,"
"My love shall hear the music of my hounds."
"Uncouple in the western valley, let them go:"
"Dispatch, I say, and find the forester."
"Exit an Attendant"
"We will, fair queen, up to the mountain's top,"
"And mark the musical confusion"
"Of hounds and echo in conjunction."
"I was with Hercules and Cadmus once,"
"When in a wood of Crete they bay'd the bear"
"With hounds of Sparta: never did I hear"
"Such gallant chiding: for, besides the groves,"
"The skies, the fountains, every region near"
"Seem'd all one mutual cry: I never heard"
"So musical a discord, such sweet thunder."
"My hounds are bred out of the Spartan kind,"
"So flew'd, so sanded, and their heads are hung"
"With ears that sweep away the morning dew,"
"Crook-knee'd, and dew-lapp'd like Thessalian bulls,"
"Slow in pursuit, but match'd in mouth like bells,"
"Each under each. A cry more tuneable"
"Was never holla'd to, nor cheer'd with horn,"
"In Crete, in Sparta, nor in Thessaly:"
"Judge when you hear. But, soft! what nymphs are these?"
"My lord, this is my daughter here asleep,"
"And this, Lysander, this Demetrius is,"
"This Helena, old Nedar's Helena:"
"I wonder of their being here together."
"No doubt they rose up early to observe"
"The rite of May, and hearing our intent,"
"Came here in grace our solemnity."
"But speak, Egeus, is not this the day"
"That Hermia should give answer of her choice?"
"It is, my lord."
"Go, bid the huntsmen wake them with their horns."
"Horns and shout within. LYSANDER, DEMETRIUS, HELENA, and HERMIA wake and start up"
"Good morrow, friends. Saint Valentine is past:"
"Begin these wood-birds but to couple now?"
"Pardon, my lord."
"I pray you all, stand up."
"I know you two are rival enemies:"
"How comes this gentle concord in the world,"
"That hatred is so far from jealousy,"
"To sleep by hate, and fear no enmity?"
"My lord, I shall reply amazedly,"
"Half sleep, half waking: but as yet, I swear,"
"I cannot truly say how I came here,"
"But, as I think,--for truly would I speak,"
"And now do I bethink me, so it is,--"
"I came with Hermia hither: our intent"
"Was to be gone from Athens, where we might,"
"Without the peril of the Athenian law."
"Enough, enough, my lord, you have enough:"
"I beg the law, the law, upon his head."
"They would have stolen away, they would, Demetrius,"
"Thereby to have defeated you and me,"
"You of your wife and me of my consent,"
"Of my consent that she should be your wife."
"My lord, fair Helen told me of their stealth,"
"Of this their purpose hither to this wood,"
"And I in fury hither follow'd them,"
"Fair Helena in fancy following me."
"But, my good lord, I wot not by what power,--"
"But by some power it is,--my love to Hermia,"
"Melted as the snow, seems to me now"
"As the remembrance of an idle gaud"
"Which in my childhood I did dote upon,"
"And all the faith, the virtue of my heart,"
"The object and the pleasure of mine eye,"
"Is only Helena. To her, my lord,"
"Was I betroth'd ere I saw Hermia:"
"But, like in sickness, did I loathe this food,"
"But, as in health, come to my natural taste,"
"Now I do wish it, love it, long for it,"
"And will for evermore be true to it."
"Fair lovers, you are fortunately met:"
"Of this discourse we more will hear anon."
"Egeus, I will overbear your will,"
"For in the temple by and by with us"
"These couples shall eternally be knit:"
"And, for the morning now is something worn,"
"Our purposed hunting shall be set aside."
"Away with us to Athens, three and three,"
"We'll hold a feast in great solemnity."
"Come, Hippolyta."
"Exeunt THESEUS, HIPPOLYTA, EGEUS, and train"
"These things seem small and undistinguishable,"
"Methinks I see these things with parted eye,"
"When every thing seems double."
"So methinks:"
"And I have found Demetrius like a jewel,"
"Mine own, and not mine own."
"Are you sure"
"That we are awake? It seems to me"
"That yet we sleep, we dream. Do not you think"
"The duke was here, and bid us follow him?"
"Yea, and my father."
"And Hippolyta."
"And he did bid us follow to the temple."
"Why, then, we are awake: let's follow him"
"And by the way let us recount our dreams."
Exeunt
"[Awaking]  When my cue comes, call me, and I will"
"answer: my next is, 'Most fair Pyramus.' Heigh-ho!"
"Peter Quince! Flute, the bellows-mender! Snout,"
"the tinker! Starveling! God's my life, stolen"
"hence, and left me asleep! I have had a most rare"
"vision. I have had a dream, past the wit of man to"
"say what dream it was: man is but an ass, if he go"
"about to expound this dream. Methought I was--there"
"is no man can tell what. Methought I was,--and"
"methought I had,--but man is but a patched fool, if"
"he will offer to say what methought I had. The eye"
"of man hath not heard, the ear of man hath not"
"seen, man's hand is not able to taste, his tongue"
"to conceive, nor his heart to report, what my dream"
"was. I will get Peter Quince to write a ballad of"
"this dream: it shall be called Bottom's Dream,"
"because it hath no bottom, and I will sing it in the"
"latter end of a play, before the duke:"
"peradventure, to make it the more gracious, I shall"
"sing it at her death."
Exit
"SCENE II. Athens. QUINCE'S house."
"Enter QUINCE, FLUTE, SNOUT, and STARVELING"
"Have you sent to Bottom's house ? is he come home yet?"
"He cannot be heard of. Out of doubt he is"
transported.
"If he come not, then the play is marred: it goes"
"not forward, doth it?"
"It is not possible: you have not a man in all"
"Athens able to discharge Pyramus but he."
"No, he hath simply the best wit of any handicraft"
"man in Athens."
"Yea and the best person too, and he is a very"
"paramour for a sweet voice."
"You must say 'paragon:' a paramour is, God bless us,"
"a thing of naught."
"Enter SNUG"
"Masters, the duke is coming from the temple, and"
"there is two or three lords and ladies more married:"
"if our sport had gone forward, we had all been made"
men.
"O sweet bully Bottom! Thus hath he lost sixpence a"
"day during his life, he could not have 'scaped"
"sixpence a day: an the duke had not given him"
"sixpence a day for playing Pyramus, I'll be hanged,"
"he would have deserved it: sixpence a day in"
"Pyramus, or nothing."
"Enter BOTTOM"
"Where are these lads? where are these hearts?"
"Bottom! O most courageous day! O most happy hour!"
"Masters, I am to discourse wonders: but ask me not"
"what, for if I tell you, I am no true Athenian. I"
"will tell you every thing, right as it fell out."
"Let us hear, sweet Bottom."
"Not a word of me. All that I will tell you is, that"
"the duke hath dined. Get your apparel together,"
"good strings to your beards, new ribbons to your"
"pumps, meet presently at the palace, every man look"
"o'er his part, for the short and the long is, our"
"play is preferred. In any case, let Thisby have"
"clean linen, and let not him that plays the lion"
"pair his nails, for they shall hang out for the"
"lion's claws. And, most dear actors, eat no onions"
"nor garlic, for we are to utter sweet breath, and I"
"do not doubt but to hear them say, it is a sweet"
"comedy. No more words: away! go, away!"
Exeunt
"ACT V"
"SCENE I. Athens. The palace of THESEUS."
"Enter THESEUS, HIPPOLYTA, PHILOSTRATE, Lords and Attendants"
"'Tis strange my Theseus, that these"
"lovers speak of."
"More strange than true: I never may believe"
"These antique fables, nor these fairy toys."
"Lovers and madmen have such seething brains,"
"Such shaping fantasies, that apprehend"
"More than cool reason ever comprehends."
"The lunatic, the lover and the poet"
"Are of imagination all compact:"
"One sees more devils than vast hell can hold,"
"That is, the madman: the lover, all as frantic,"
"Sees Helen's beauty in a brow of Egypt:"
"The poet's eye, in fine frenzy rolling,"
"Doth glance from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven,"
"And as imagination bodies forth"
"The forms of things unknown, the poet's pen"
"Turns them to shapes and gives to airy nothing"
"A local habitation and a name."
"Such tricks hath strong imagination,"
"That if it would but apprehend some joy,"
"It comprehends some bringer of that joy,"
"Or in the night, imagining some fear,"
"How easy is a bush supposed a bear!"
"But all the story of the night told over,"
"And all their minds transfigured so together,"
"More witnesseth than fancy's images"
"And grows to something of great constancy,"
"But, howsoever, strange and admirable."
"Here come the lovers, full of joy and mirth."
"Enter LYSANDER, DEMETRIUS, HERMIA, and HELENA"
"Joy, gentle friends! joy and fresh days of love"
"Accompany your hearts!"
"More than to us"
"Wait in your royal walks, your board, your bed!"
"Come now, what masques, what dances shall we have,"
"To wear away this long age of three hours"
"Between our after-supper and bed-time?"
"Where is our usual manager of mirth?"
"What revels are in hand? Is there no play,"
"To ease the anguish of a torturing hour?"
"Call Philostrate."
"Here, mighty Theseus."
"Say, what abridgement have you for this evening?"
"What masque? what music? How shall we beguile"
"The lazy time, if not with some delight?"
"There is a brief how many sports are ripe:"
"Make choice of which your highness will see first."
"Giving a paper"
"[Reads]  'The battle with the Centaurs, to be sung"
"By an Athenian eunuch to the harp.'"
"We'll none of that: that have I told my love,"
"In glory of my kinsman Hercules."
Reads
"'The riot of the tipsy Bacchanals,"
"Tearing the Thracian singer in their rage.'"
"That is an old device, and it was play'd"
"When I from Thebes came last a conqueror."
Reads
"'The thrice three Muses mourning for the death"
"Of Learning, late deceased in beggary.'"
"That is some satire, keen and critical,"
"Not sorting with a nuptial ceremony."
Reads
"'A tedious brief scene of young Pyramus"
"And his love Thisbe, very tragical mirth.'"
"Merry and tragical! tedious and brief!"
"That is, hot ice and wondrous strange snow."
"How shall we find the concord of this discord?"
"A play there is, my lord, some ten words long,"
"Which is as brief as I have known a play,"
"But by ten words, my lord, it is too long,"
"Which makes it tedious, for in all the play"
"There is not one word apt, one player fitted:"
"And tragical, my noble lord, it is,"
"For Pyramus therein doth kill himself."
"Which, when I saw rehearsed, I must confess,"
"Made mine eyes water, but more merry tears"
"The passion of loud laughter never shed."
"What are they that do play it?"
"Hard-handed men that work in Athens here,"
"Which never labour'd in their minds till now,"
"And now have toil'd their unbreathed memories"
"With this same play, against your nuptial."
"And we will hear it."
"No, my noble lord,"
"It is not for you: I have heard it over,"
"And it is nothing, nothing in the world,"
"Unless you can find sport in their intents,"
"Extremely stretch'd and conn'd with cruel pain,"
"To do you service."
"I will hear that play,"
"For never anything can be amiss,"
"When simpleness and duty tender it."
"Go, bring them in: and take your places, ladies."
"Exit PHILOSTRATE"
"I love not to see wretchedness o'er charged"
"And duty in his service perishing."
"Why, gentle sweet, you shall see no such thing."
"He says they can do nothing in this kind."
"The kinder we, to give them thanks for nothing."
"Our sport shall be to take what they mistake:"
"And what poor duty cannot do, noble respect"
"Takes it in might, not merit."
"Where I have come, great clerks have purposed"
"To greet me with premeditated welcomes,"
"Where I have seen them shiver and look pale,"
"Make periods in the midst of sentences,"
"Throttle their practised accent in their fears"
"And in conclusion dumbly have broke off,"
"Not paying me a welcome. Trust me, sweet,"
"Out of this silence yet I pick'd a welcome,"
"And in the modesty of fearful duty"
"I read as much as from the rattling tongue"
"Of saucy and audacious eloquence."
"Love, therefore, and tongue-tied simplicity"
"In least speak most, to my capacity."
"Re-enter PHILOSTRATE"
"So please your grace, the Prologue is address'd."
"Let him approach."
"Flourish of trumpets"
"Enter QUINCE for the Prologue"
"If we offend, it is with our good will."
"That you should think, we come not to offend,"
"But with good will. To show our simple skill,"
"That is the true beginning of our end."
"Consider then we come but in despite."
"We do not come as minding to contest you,"
"Our true intent is. All for your delight"
"We are not here. That you should here repent you,"
"The actors are at hand and by their show"
"You shall know all that you are like to know."
"This fellow doth not stand upon points."
"He hath rid his prologue like a rough colt, he knows"
"not the stop. A good moral, my lord: it is not"
"enough to speak, but to speak true."
"Indeed he hath played on his prologue like a child"
"on a recorder, a sound, but not in government."
"His speech, was like a tangled chain, nothing"
"impaired, but all disordered. Who is next?"
"Enter Pyramus and Thisbe, Wall, Moonshine, and Lion"
"Gentles, perchance you wonder at this show,"
"But wonder on, till truth make all things plain."
"This man is Pyramus, if you would know,"
"This beauteous lady Thisby is certain."
"This man, with lime and rough-cast, doth present"
"Wall, that vile Wall which did these lovers sunder,"
"And through Wall's chink, poor souls, they are content"
"To whisper. At the which let no man wonder."
"This man, with lanthorn, dog, and bush of thorn,"
"Presenteth Moonshine, for, if you will know,"
"By moonshine did these lovers think no scorn"
"To meet at Ninus' tomb, there, there to woo."
"This grisly beast, which Lion hight by name,"
"The trusty Thisby, coming first by night,"
"Did scare away, or rather did affright,"
"And, as she fled, her mantle she did fall,"
"Which Lion vile with bloody mouth did stain."
"Anon comes Pyramus, sweet youth and tall,"
"And finds his trusty Thisby's mantle slain:"
"Whereat, with blade, with bloody blameful blade,"
"He bravely broach'd is boiling bloody breast,"
"And Thisby, tarrying in mulberry shade,"
"His dagger drew, and died. For all the rest,"
"Let Lion, Moonshine, Wall, and lovers twain"
"At large discourse, while here they do remain."
"Exeunt Prologue, Thisbe, Lion, and Moonshine"
"I wonder if the lion be to speak."
"No wonder, my lord: one lion may, when many asses do."
"In this same interlude it doth befall"
"That I, one Snout by name, present a wall,"
"And such a wall, as I would have you think,"
"That had in it a crannied hole or chink,"
"Through which the lovers, Pyramus and Thisby,"
"Did whisper often very secretly."
"This loam, this rough-cast and this stone doth show"
"That I am that same wall, the truth is so:"
"And this the cranny is, right and sinister,"
"Through which the fearful lovers are to whisper."
"Would you desire lime and hair to speak better?"
"It is the wittiest partition that ever I heard"
"discourse, my lord."
"Enter Pyramus"
"Pyramus draws near the wall: silence!"
"O grim-look'd night! O night with hue so black!"
"O night, which ever art when day is not!"
"O night, O night! alack, alack, alack,"
"I fear my Thisby's promise is forgot!"
"And thou, O wall, O sweet, O lovely wall,"
"That stand'st between her father's ground and mine!"
"Thou wall, O wall, O sweet and lovely wall,"
"Show me thy chink, to blink through with mine eyne!"
"Wall holds up his fingers"
"Thanks, courteous wall: Jove shield thee well for this!"
"But what see I? No Thisby do I see."
"O wicked wall, through whom I see no bliss!"
"Cursed be thy stones for thus deceiving me!"
"The wall, methinks, being sensible, should curse again."
"No, in truth, sir, he should not. 'Deceiving me'"
"is Thisby's cue: she is to enter now, and I am to"
"spy her through the wall. You shall see, it will"
"fall pat as I told you. Yonder she comes."
"Enter Thisbe"
"O wall, full often hast thou heard my moans,"
"For parting my fair Pyramus and me!"
"My cherry lips have often kiss'd thy stones,"
"Thy stones with lime and hair knit up in thee."
"I see a voice: now will I to the chink,"
"To spy an I can hear my Thisby's face. Thisby!"
"My love thou art, my love I think."
"Think what thou wilt, I am thy lover's grace,"
"And, like Limander, am I trusty still."
"And I like Helen, till the Fates me kill."
"Not Shafalus to Procrus was so true."
"As Shafalus to Procrus, I to you."
"O kiss me through the hole of this vile wall!"
"I kiss the wall's hole, not your lips at all."
"Wilt thou at Ninny's tomb meet me straightway?"
"'Tide life, 'tide death, I come without delay."
"Exeunt Pyramus and Thisbe"
"Thus have I, Wall, my part discharged so,"
"And, being done, thus Wall away doth go."
Exit
"Now is the mural down between the two neighbours."
"No remedy, my lord, when walls are so wilful to hear"
"without warning."
"This is the silliest stuff that ever I heard."
"The best in this kind are but shadows, and the worst"
"are no worse, if imagination amend them."
"It must be your imagination then, and not theirs."
"If we imagine no worse of them than they of"
"themselves, they may pass for excellent men. Here"
"come two noble beasts in, a man and a lion."
"Enter Lion and Moonshine"
"You, ladies, you, whose gentle hearts do fear"
"The smallest monstrous mouse that creeps on floor,"
"May now perchance both quake and tremble here,"
"When lion rough in wildest rage doth roar."
"Then know that I, one Snug the joiner, am"
"A lion-fell, nor else no lion's dam,"
"For, if I should as lion come in strife"
"Into this place, 'twere pity on my life."
"A very gentle beast, of a good conscience."
"The very best at a beast, my lord, that e'er I saw."
"This lion is a very fox for his valour."
"True, and a goose for his discretion."
"Not so, my lord, for his valour cannot carry his"
"discretion, and the fox carries the goose."
"His discretion, I am sure, cannot carry his valour,"
"for the goose carries not the fox. It is well:"
"leave it to his discretion, and let us listen to the moon."
"This lanthorn doth the horned moon present,--"
"He should have worn the horns on his head."
"He is no crescent, and his horns are"
"invisible within the circumference."
"This lanthorn doth the horned moon present,"
"Myself the man i' the moon do seem to be."
"This is the greatest error of all the rest: the man"
"should be put into the lanthorn. How is it else the"
"man i' the moon?"
"He dares not come there for the candle, for, you"
"see, it is already in snuff."
"I am aweary of this moon: would he would change!"
"It appears, by his small light of discretion, that"
"he is in the wane, but yet, in courtesy, in all"
"reason, we must stay the time."
"Proceed, Moon."
"All that I have to say, is, to tell you that the"
"lanthorn is the moon, I, the man in the moon, this"
"thorn-bush, my thorn-bush, and this dog, my dog."
"Why, all these should be in the lanthorn, for all"
"these are in the moon. But, silence! here comes Thisbe."
"Enter Thisbe"
"This is old Ninny's tomb. Where is my love?"
"[Roaring]  Oh--"
"Thisbe runs off"
"Well roared, Lion."
"Well run, Thisbe."
"Well shone, Moon. Truly, the moon shines with a"
"good grace."
"The Lion shakes Thisbe's mantle, and exit"
"Well moused, Lion."
"And so the lion vanished."
"And then came Pyramus."
"Enter Pyramus"
"Sweet Moon, I thank thee for thy sunny beams,"
"I thank thee, Moon, for shining now so bright,"
"For, by thy gracious, golden, glittering gleams,"
"I trust to take of truest Thisby sight."
"But stay, O spite!"
"But mark, poor knight,"
"What dreadful dole is here!"
"Eyes, do you see?"
"How can it be?"
"O dainty duck! O dear!"
"Thy mantle good,"
"What, stain'd with blood!"
"Approach, ye Furies fell!"
"O Fates, come, come,"
"Cut thread and thrum,"
"Quail, crush, conclude, and quell!"
"This passion, and the death of a dear friend, would"
"go near to make a man look sad."
"Beshrew my heart, but I pity the man."
"O wherefore, Nature, didst thou lions frame?"
"Since lion vile hath here deflower'd my dear:"
"Which is--no, no--which was the fairest dame"
"That lived, that loved, that liked, that look'd"
"with cheer."
"Come, tears, confound,"
"Out, sword, and wound"
"The pap of Pyramus,"
"Ay, that left pap,"
"Where heart doth hop:"
"Stabs himself"
"Thus die I, thus, thus, thus."
"Now am I dead,"
"Now am I fled,"
"My soul is in the sky:"
"Tongue, lose thy light,"
"Moon take thy flight:"
"Exit Moonshine"
"Now die, die, die, die, die."
Dies
"No die, but an ace, for him, for he is but one."
"Less than an ace, man, for he is dead, he is nothing."
"With the help of a surgeon he might yet recover, and"
"prove an ass."
"How chance Moonshine is gone before Thisbe comes"
"back and finds her lover?"
"She will find him by starlight. Here she comes, and"
"her passion ends the play."
"Re-enter Thisbe"
"Methinks she should not use a long one for such a"
"Pyramus: I hope she will be brief."
"A mote will turn the balance, which Pyramus, which"
"Thisbe, is the better, he for a man, God warrant us,"
"she for a woman, God bless us."
"She hath spied him already with those sweet eyes."
"And thus she means, videlicet:--"
"Asleep, my love?"
"What, dead, my dove?"
"O Pyramus, arise!"
"Speak, speak. Quite dumb?"
"Dead, dead? A tomb"
"Must cover thy sweet eyes."
"These My lips,"
"This cherry nose,"
"These yellow cowslip cheeks,"
"Are gone, are gone:"
"Lovers, make moan:"
"His eyes were green as leeks."
"O Sisters Three,"
"Come, come to me,"
"With hands as pale as milk,"
"Lay them in gore,"
"Since you have shore"
"With shears his thread of silk."
"Tongue, not a word:"
"Come, trusty sword,"
"Come, blade, my breast imbrue:"
"Stabs herself"
"And, farewell, friends,"
"Thus Thisby ends:"
"Adieu, adieu, adieu."
Dies
"Moonshine and Lion are left to bury the dead."
"Ay, and Wall too."
"[Starting up]  No assure you, the wall is down that"
"parted their fathers. Will it please you to see the"
"epilogue, or to hear a Bergomask dance between two"
"of our company?"
"No epilogue, I pray you, for your play needs no"
"excuse. Never excuse, for when the players are all"
"dead, there needs none to be blamed. Marry, if he"
"that writ it had played Pyramus and hanged himself"
"in Thisbe's garter, it would have been a fine"
"tragedy: and so it is, truly, and very notably"
"discharged. But come, your Bergomask: let your"
"epilogue alone."
"A dance"
"The iron tongue of midnight hath told twelve:"
"Lovers, to bed, 'tis almost fairy time."
"I fear we shall out-sleep the coming morn"
"As much as we this night have overwatch'd."
"This palpable-gross play hath well beguiled"
"The heavy gait of night. Sweet friends, to bed."
"A fortnight hold we this solemnity,"
"In nightly revels and new jollity."
Exeunt
"Enter PUCK"
"Now the hungry lion roars,"
"And the wolf behowls the moon,"
"Whilst the heavy ploughman snores,"
"All with weary task fordone."
"Now the wasted brands do glow,"
"Whilst the screech-owl, screeching loud,"
"Puts the wretch that lies in woe"
"In remembrance of a shroud."
"Now it is the time of night"
"That the graves all gaping wide,"
"Every one lets forth his sprite,"
"In the church-way paths to glide:"
"And we fairies, that do run"
"By the triple Hecate's team,"
"From the presence of the sun,"
"Following darkness like a dream,"
"Now are frolic: not a mouse"
"Shall disturb this hallow'd house:"
"I am sent with broom before,"
"To sweep the dust behind the door."
"Enter OBERON and TITANIA with their train"
"Through the house give gathering light,"
"By the dead and drowsy fire:"
"Every elf and fairy sprite"
"Hop as light as bird from brier,"
"And this ditty, after me,"
"Sing, and dance it trippingly."
"First, rehearse your song by rote"
"To each word a warbling note:"
"Hand in hand, with fairy grace,"
"Will we sing, and bless this place."
"Song and dance"
"Now, until the break of day,"
"Through this house each fairy stray."
"To the best bride-bed will we,"
"Which by us shall blessed be,"
"And the issue there create"
"Ever shall be fortunate."
"So shall all the couples three"
"Ever true in loving be,"
"And the blots of Nature's hand"
"Shall not in their issue stand,"
"Never mole, hare lip, nor scar,"
"Nor mark prodigious, such as are"
"Despised in nativity,"
"Shall upon their children be."
"With this field-dew consecrate,"
"Every fairy take his gait,"
"And each several chamber bless,"
"Through this palace, with sweet peace,"
"And the owner of it blest"
"Ever shall in safety rest."
"Trip away, make no stay,"
"Meet me all by break of day."
"Exeunt OBERON, TITANIA, and train"
"If we shadows have offended,"
"Think but this, and all is mended,"
"That you have but slumber'd here"
"While these visions did appear."
"And this weak and idle theme,"
"No more yielding but a dream,"
"Gentles, do not reprehend:"
"if you pardon, we will mend:"
"And, as I am an honest Puck,"
"If we have unearned luck"
"Now to 'scape the serpent's tongue,"
"We will make amends ere long,"
"Else the Puck a liar call,"
"So, good night unto you all."
"Give me your hands, if we be friends,"
"And Robin shall restore amends."